
ANCIENT EGYPT
This fully revised and updated third edition of the bestselling Ancient Egypt seeks to identify what gave
ancient Egypt its distinctive and enduring characteristics, ranging across material culture, the mindset of its
people, and social and economic factors.
In this volume, Barry J. Kemp identifies the ideas by which the Egyptians organized their experience of
the world and explains how they maintained a uniform style in their art and architecture across three thousand
years, whilst accommodating substantial changes in outlook. The underlying aim is to relate ancient
Egypt to the broader mainstream of our understanding of how all human societies function.
Source material is taken from ancient written documents, while the book also highlights the contribution
that archaeology makes to our understanding of Egyptian culture and society. It uses numerous case studies,
illustrating them with artwork expressly prepared from specialist sources. Broad ranging yet impressively
detailed, the book is an indispensable text for all students of ancient Egypt and for the general reader.
Barry J. Kemp is Emeritus Professor of Egyptology (University of Cambridge), Senior Fellow of the
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research (University of Cambridge) and director of the Amarna
Project.

ANCIENT EGYPT
Anatomy of a Civilization
Third Edition
Barry J. Kemp
﻿
First published 2018
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2018 Barry J. Kemp
The right of Barry J. Kemp to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks,
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing- in- Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Names: Kemp, Barry J., author.
Title: Ancient Egypt : anatomy of a civilization / Barry J. Kemp.
Description: 3[rd edition]. | Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY : Routledge, 2018. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017045977 (print) | LCCN 2017048871 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781351166485 (Master) | ISBN 9781351166461 (ePUB) |
ISBN 9781351166454 (Mobi/Kindle) | ISBN 9781351166478 (Web PDF) |
ISBN 9780415827256 (hardback : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780415827263 (pbk. : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Egypt–Civilization–To 332 B.C.
Classification: LCC DT61 (ebook) | LCC DT61 .K44 2018 (print) |
DDC 932/.1—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017045977
ISBN: 9780415827256 (hbk)
ISBN: 9780415827263 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781351166485 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Out of House Publishing
v
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements vii
List of abbreviations of works viii
Introduction 1
PART I
Establishing identity 21
1 Who were the ancient Egyptians? 23
2 The intellectual foundations of the early state 57
3 The dynamics of culture 110
PART II
The provider state 163
4 The bureaucratic mind 165
5 Model communities 194
PART III
Intimations of our futures 245
6 New Kingdom Egypt: the mature state 247
Contents
vi
7 The birth of economic man 294
8 Egypt in microcosm: the city of Amarna 320
Index 381
vii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am indebted to the editorial staff at Routledge for urging on me, for the second time, a revised edition,
and for patience in waiting for me to complete it long after I should have. They provided feedback from
colleagues which, in particular, persuaded me to restore a rewritten chapter on Amarna in place of the last
chapter of the second edition. Over the years I have gained much from discussions with Gretchen Dabbs,
Corinne Duhig, Mark Lehner, Jerry Rose, Kate Spence and Anna Stevens, the last the Amarna Project’s
assistant director. Chapter 8 could not have been written without the Amarna expedition which was, for
many years, a project of the Egypt Exploration Society and is now, as the Amarna Project, supported by the
Amarna Trust and (in the USA) the Amarna Research Foundation. Working at Amarna with the members
of the expedition team (whose names would fill more than a page) and with the local people has given me
a perspective on life in the past and in the present which otherwise I would have missed and been poorer
for. Following my retirement from my teaching post at the University of Cambridge I have been greatly
indebted when in Cambridge to the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research for continuing to
welcome me to its research community, to Wolfson College for its hospitality, to the Haddon Library and
Cambridge University Library (a true cathedral of knowledge) for access to their collections, and likewise
when in Cairo to the library of the American Research Center in Egypt. My wife, Miriam, has constantly
provided much pragmatic support and wisdom as I have worked (sometimes struggled) to complete this
revision.
For illustrations thanks are due to the following for permission to reproduce photographs: Daniel
Polz and the German Archaeological Institute in Cairo: Photograph 3.1; The Egypt Exploration
Society: Photographs 8.2 and 8.3. Sonia Zakrzewski provided me with an original chart for Figure 1.12
and permission to use it. The drawings for Figures 0.3, 2.3, 4.2 and 6.7 were made by Barbara Garfi; for
Figure 2.12 and objects in Figures 3.7, 3.11, 6.12 and 8.19 by Andy Boyce; designs in Figures 2.18 and 8.20
are by Miriam Bertram. Thames & Hudson (with the permission of the authors) allowed me to see a proof
of their forthcoming book, M. Lehner and Z. Hawass, Giza and the Pyramids (now published, late 2017).
viii
ABBREVIATIONS OF WORKS (OTHER
THAN JOURNAL ARTICLES) CITED
MORE THAN ONCE IN THE NOTES
OR CAPTIONS
Works abbreviated by title
AfO Archiv für Orientforschung
AJA American Journal of Archaeology
AJPA American Journal of Physical Anthropology
AJSL American Journal of Semitic Languages
AR Amarna Reports. 6 vols. London, EES, 1984– 95.
ASAE Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Égypte
Ä&L Ägypten und Levante
BIFAO Bulletin de l’Institut français d’Archéologie orientale
CAJ Cambridge Archaeological Journal
CdÉ Chronique d’Égypte
CdK Cahiers de Karnak
EA Egyptian Archaeology
GM Göttinger Miszellen
JAEI Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society
JARCE Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt
JAS Journal of Archaeological Science
JEA Journal of Egyptian Archaeology
JEH Journal of Egyptian History
JESHO Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient
JFA Journal of Field Archaeology
JNES Journal of Near Eastern Studies
JSSEA Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities (Toronto)
LAAA Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology (Liverpool)
LD C.R. Lepsius, ed., Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien. 6 vols in 12. Berlin, 1849– 58.
Lexikon W. Helck and E. Otto (later W. Helck and W. Westendorf), eds, Lexikon der Ägyptologie, 6
vols, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 1975– 86.
MDAIK Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts, Abteilung Kairo
MDIAAK Mitteilungen des Deutschen Instituts für Ägyptische Altertumskunde in Kairo
Abbreviations
ix
MDOG Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient- Gesellschaft zu Berlin
MM Journal Metropolitan Museum Journal
NARCE Newsletter, American Research Center in Egypt
RdÉ Revue d’Égyptologie
SAK Studien zur Altägyptischen Kultur
Urk. IV K. Sethe, Urkunden der 18. Dynastie. Leipzig, Hinrichs, 1905– 9; W. Helck, Urkunden der 18.
Dynastie. Berlin, Akademie- Verlag, 1955– 8.
VA Varia Aegyptiaca
Wb. A. Erman and H. Grapow, Wörterbuch der ägyptischen Sprache. 12 vols in 10. Leipzig,
Hinrichs, 1926– 63.
ZÄS Zeitschrift für Ägyptische Sprache
Institutional and publisher abbreviations
A&P Aris & Phillips
AUC American University Cairo
BM British Museum
BroM Brooklyn Museum
BSAE British School of Archaeology in Egypt
CoUP Cornell University Press
CUP Cambridge University Press
DAIK Deutsches Archäologisches Institut. Abteilung Kairo
EEF Egypt Exploration Fund
EES Egypt Exploration Society
GI Griffith Institute
HUP Harvard University Press
IFAO Institut français d’Archéologie orientale du Caire
KPI Kegan Paul International
MFA Museum of Fine Arts
MMA Metropolitan Museum of Art
NINO Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten
OUP Oxford University Press
T&H Thames & Hudson
UCP University of Chicago Press
VOAW Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften
V&R Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht
W&N Weidenfeld & Nicolson
YUP Yale University Press
Works abbreviated by author and title
Adams, Ancient Hierakonpolis – B. Adams, Ancient Hierakonpolis, with Supplement, Warminster,
A&P, 1974.
Adams, Ancient Nekhen – B. Adams, Ancient Nekhen: Garstang in the City of Hierakonpolis, New Malden, SIA
Publications, 1995.
Adams, Nubia – W.Y. Adams, Nubia: Corridor to Africa, London, Allen Lane, 1977.
Abbreviations
x
Adams, ‘Textual window’ – M.D. Adams, ‘A textual window on the settlement system in ancient Egypt.’
In J. Lustig, ed., Anthropology and Egyptology: a Developing Dialogue, Sheffield, Sheffield Academic Press,
1997, 90– 105.
Allen, Genesis in Egypt – J.P. Allen, Genesis in Egypt: the Philosophy of Ancient Egyptian Creation Accounts, New
Haven, CT, Dept of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations, 1988.
Allen, Heqanakht – J.P. Allen, The Heqanakht Papyri, New York, MMA, 2002.
Arnold, Qasr el-Sagha – D. and Do. Arnold, Der Tempel Qasr el-Sagha, Mainz, von Zabern, 1979.
Arnold, Royal Women – Do. Arnold, The Royal Women of Amarna: Images of Beauty from Ancient Egypt,
New York, MMA, 1996.
Arnold, Tempel Mentuhotep – D. Arnold, Der Tempel des Königs Mentuhotep von Deir el- Bahari I. Architektur
und Deutung, Mainz, von Zabern, 1974.
Ayrton et al., Abydos III – E.R. Ayrton, C.T. Currelly and A.E.P. Weigall, Abydos III, London, EEF, 1904.
Bakir, Slavery – Abd el- Mohsen Bakir, Slavery in Pharaonic Egypt, Cairo, IFAO, 1952.
Bard, Encyclopedia – K.A. Bard, ed., Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt, London and New York,
Routledge, 1999.
Bietak, Avaris – M. Bietak, Avaris: Capital of the Hyksos: Recent Excavations at Tell el- Dabʾa, London,
BM, 1996.
Bietak, Haus und Palast – M. Bietak, ed., Haus und Palast im alten Ägypten, Vienna, VOAW, 1996.
Bietak et al., Cities – M. Bietak, E. Czerny and I. Forstner- Müller, eds, Cities and Urbanism in Ancient Egypt,
Vienna, VOAW, 2010.
Bloch, ‘Religion’ – M. Bloch, ‘Why religion is nothing special but is central.’ In The Sapient Mind: Archaeology
Meets Neuroscience. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society (June 2008), 2055– 62.
Blyth, Karnak – E. Blyth, Karnak: Evolution of at Temple, London and New York, Routledge, 2006.
Borchardt, Grabdenkmal – L. Borchardt, Das Grabdenkmal des Königs Nefer- ir- ke- reʾ, Leipzig, Hinrichs, 1909.
Borchardt, Tempel – L. Borchardt, Ägyptische Tempel mit Umgang, Cairo, Selbsverlag, 1938.
Borchardt and Ricke, Wohnhäuser – L. Borchardt and H. Ricke, Die Wohnhäuser in Tell el- Amarna, Berlin,
Mann, 1980.
Breasted, Ancient Records – J.H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt: Historical Documents, 5 vols, Chicago, IL,
UCP, 1906– 7.
Brunton, Mostagedda – G. Brunton, Mostagedda and the Tasian Culture, London, Quaritch, 1937.
Brunton, Qau – G. Brunton, Qau and Badari, 3 vols, London, BSAE, 1927– 30.
Bussmann, Provinztempel – R. Bussmann, Die Provinztempel Ägyptens von der 0. bis zur 11. Dynastie, Leiden
and Boston, MA, Brill, 2010.
Butzer, Hydraulic Civilization – K.W. Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt: a Study in Cultural Ecology,
Chicago, IL, and London, UCP, 1976.
Caminos, Miscellanies – R.A. Caminos, Late- Egyptian Miscellanies, London, OUP, 1954.
Černy, Community – J. Černy, A Community of Workmen at Thebes in the Ramesside Period, Cairo, IFAO,
1973, 2000.
Charloux and Mensam, Karnak – G. Charloux and R. Mensam, Karnak avant la XVIIIe dynastie, Paris,
Soleb, 2012.
Chłodnicki et al., Tell el- Farkha – M. Chłodnicki, K.M. Ciałowicz and A. Mączyńska, eds, Tell El- Farkha
I. Excavations 1998– 2011, Poznań (Archaeological Museum) and Kraków (Institute of Archaeology,
Jagiellonian University), 2012 = www.muzarp.poznan.pl/ wp- content/ uploads/ 2012/ 12/ Tell- el-
Farkha- I- Excavations- 1998- 2011_ download.pdf.
Clarke and Engelbach, Masonry – S. Clarke and R. Engelbach, Ancient Egyptian Masonry, London, OUP,
1930.
Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Accounts – M. Collier and S. Quirke, eds, The UCL Lahun Papyri: Accounts,
Oxford, Archaeopress, 2006.
Abbreviations
xi
Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Letters – M. Collier and S. Quirke, The UCL Lahun Papyri: Letters, Oxford,
Archaeopress, 2002.
Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Religious – M. Collier and S. Quirke, The UCL Lahun Papyri: Religious, Literary,
Legal, Mathematical and Medical, Oxford, Archaeopress, 2004.
Collier and Snape, Ramesside Studies – M. Collier and S. Snape, eds, Ramesside Studies in Honour of K.A.
Kitchen, Bolton, Rutherford, 2011.
Cooney, Amarna Reliefs – J.D. Cooney, Amarna Reliefs from Hermopolis in American Collections, Brooklyn, NY,
BroM and Mainz, von Zabern, 1965.
Czerny, Tell el- Dabʾa IX – E. Czerny, Tell el- Dabʾa IX. Eine Plansiedlung des frühen Mittleren Reiches, Vienna,
VOAW, 1999.
Darnell and Manassa, Tutankhamun’s Armies – J.C. Darnell and C. Manassa, Tutankhamun’s Armies: Battle and
Conquest during Ancient Egypt’s Late 18th Dynasty, Hoboken, NJ, and Chichester, Wiley, 2007.
Davies, Historical Inscriptions – B. Davies, Egyptian Historical Inscriptions of the Nineteenth Dynasty, Jonsered,
Paul Åströms Förlag, 1997.
Davies, Rekh- mi- rē ʾ – N. de G. Davies, The Tomb of Rekh- mi- rē ʾ at Thebes, New York, MMA, 1935.
Davies, Rock Tombs – N. de G. Davies, The Rock Tombs of El Amarna, 6 vols, London, EEF, 1903– 8, reprinted
as 3 vols, 2004.
Davies, Two Ramesside Tombs – N. de G. Davies, Two Ramesside Tombs at Thebes, New York, MMA, 1927.
Deir el- Medina Studies – J. Toivari- Viitala, T. Vartiainen and S. Uvanto, eds, Deir el- Medina Studies; Helsinki
June 24– 26, 2009 Proceedings, Vantaa, Finnish Egyptological Society, 2014.
Demarée and Valbelle, Les registres – R. Demarée and D. Valbelle, Les registres de recensement du village de Deir
el- Médineh (Le ‘Stato Civile’), Leuven, etc., Peeters, 2011.
Dreyer, Elephantine VIII – G. Dreyer, Elephantine VIII. Der Tempel der Satet: die Funde der Frühzeit und des
Alten Reiches, Mainz, von Zabern, 1986.
Dreyer, Umm El- Qaab I – G. Dreyer, Umm El- Qaab I, Das prädynastische Königsgrab U- j und seine frühen
Schriftzeugnisse, Mainz, von Zabern, 1998.
Dunham and Janssen, Semna Kumma – D. Dunham and J.M.A. Janssen, Semna Kumma, Boston, MA,
MFA, 1960.
Dunham, Uronarti – D. Dunham, Uronarti Shalfak Mirgissa, Boston, MA, MFA, 1967.
Elephantine: the Ancient Town – [W. Kaiser], Elephantine: the Ancient Town. The Official Guidebook of the German
Institute of Archaeology, Cairo, DAIK, 1998.
Emery et al., Buhen – W.B. Emery, H.S. Smith and A. Millard, The Fortress of Buhen: the Archaeological Report,
London, EES, 1979.
Engelbach, Obelisk – R. Engelbach, The Aswân Obelisk; with Remarks on the Ancient Engineering, Cairo,
IFAO, 1922.
Epigraphic Survey, Kheruef – The Epigraphic Survey, The Tomb of Kheruef, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1980.
Epigraphic Survey, Khonsu – The Epigraphic Survey, The Temple of Khonsu, 1. Scenes of King Herihor in the
Court, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1979.
Eyre, ‘Work in the New Kingdom’ – C.J. Eyre, ‘Work and the organisation of work in the New Kingdom.’
In M.A. Powell, ed., Labor in the Ancient Near East, New Haven, CT, American Oriental Society,
1987, 167– 221.
Eyre, ‘Work in the Old Kingdom’ – C.J. Eyre, ‘Work and the organisation of work in the Old Kingdom.’
In M.A. Powell, ed., Labor in the Ancient Near East, New Haven, CT, American Oriental Society,
1987, 5– 47.
Fairservis, Hierakonpolis – 1978 W.A. Fairservis, The Hierakonpolis Project, Season January to March 1978.
Excavation of the Temple Area on the Kom el Gemuwia, Poughkeepsie, NY, Vassar College, 1983.
Fakhry, Dahshur Reliefs – A. Fakhry, The Monuments of Sneferu at Dahshur II. The Valley Temple I. The Temple
Reliefs, Cairo, General Organisation for Government Printing Offices, 1961.
Abbreviations
xii
Faulkner, Coffin Texts – R.O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Coffin Texts, revised edn of 3 vols in 1,
Warminster, A&P, 2004, 2007.
Firth and Quibell, Step Pyramid – C.M. Firth and J.E. Quibell, The Step Pyramid, 2 vols, Cairo, IFAO, 1935.
Frankfort, Kingship – H. Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1948.
Frankfort, Mural Paintings – H. Frankfort, ed., The Mural Paintings of El ‘Amarneh, London, EES, 1929.
Frankfort and Pendlebury, COA II – H. Frankfort and J.D.S. Pendlebury, The City of Akhenaten II, London,
EES, 1933.
Freed, Pharaohs of the Sun – R.E. Freed, Y.J. Markowitz and S.H. D’Auria, eds, Pharaohs of the Sun: Akhenaten,
Nefertiti, Tutankhamen, Boston, MA, MFA, 1999.
Friedman, Egypt and Nubia – R. Friedman, ed., Egypt and Nubia: Gifts of the Desert, London, BM, 2002.
Gardiner and Faulkner, Wilbour – A.H. Gardiner and R.O. Faulkner, The Wilbour Papyrus I– IV, Brooklyn,
BroM and Oxford, OUP, 1941– 52.
Gillings, Mathematics – R.J. Gillings, Mathematics in the Time of the Pharaohs, Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press, 1972.
Glanville, Studies Griffith – S.R.K. Glanville, ed., Studies Presented to F.Ll. Griffith, London and Oxford, OUP,
1932.
Grandet, Harris I – P. Grandet, Le papyrus Harris I (BM 9999), 2 vols, Cairo, IFAO, 1994.
Griffith, Papyri – F.Ll. Griffith, The Petrie Papyri: Hieratic Papyri from Kahun and Gurob, London, Quaritch, 1898.
Guksch, Grab des Benja – H. Guksch, Das Grab des Benja, gen. Paheqamen: Theben No. 343, Mainz, von
Zabern, 1978.
Häggman, Deir el- Medina – S. Häggman, Directing Deir el- Medina: the External Administration of the Necropolis,
Uppsala, Uppsala University, 2002.
Haring, Divine Households – B.J.J. Haring, Divine Households: Administrative and Economic Aspects of the New
Kingdom Royal Memorial Temples in Western Thebes, Leiden, NINO, 1997.
Hassan, Gîza IV – Selim Hassan, Excavations at Gîza IV (1932– 33), Cairo, Government Press, 1943.
Hayes, Papyrus – W.C. Hayes, A Papyrus of the Late Middle Kingdom in the Brooklyn Museum, Brooklyn, NY,
BroM, 1955.
Helck, Beziehungen – W. Helck, Die Beziehungen Ägyptens zu Vorderasien im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend v.Chr, 2nd
edn, Wiesbaden, Harrasowitz, 1971.
Helck, Materialien – W. Helck, Materialien zur Wirtschaftsgeschichte des Neuen Reiches, 6 vols, Wiesbaden, Verlag
der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur, Mainz and Steiner, 1960– 9.
Hölscher, Medinet Habu I – U. Hölscher, The Excavation of Medinet Habu I. General Views and Plans, Chicago,
IL, UCP, 1934.
Hölscher, Medinet Habu V – U. Hölscher, The Excavation of Medinet Habu V. Post- Ramessid Remains, Chicago,
IL, UCP, 1954.
Hölscher, Mortuary Temple I – U. Hölscher, The Mortuary Temple of Ramses III Part I, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1941.
Imhausen, Mathematics – A. Imhausen, Mathematics in Ancient Egypt: a Contextual History, Princeton, NJ, and
Oxford, Princeton University Press, 2016.
Izreʾel, Tablets – S. Izre’el, The Amarna Scholarly Tablets, Groningen, Styx, 1997.
James, Pharaoh’s People – T.G.H. James, Pharaoh’s People: Scenes from Life in Imperial Egypt, London,
Batsford, 1984.
Janssen, Commodity Prices – J.J. Janssen, Commodity Prices from the Ramessid Period, Leiden, Brill, 1975.
Janssen, Ship’s Logs – J.J. Janssen, Two Ancient Egyptian Ship’s Logs, Leiden, Brill, 1961.
Janssen, Village Varia – J.J. Janssen, Village Varia: Ten Studies on the History and Administration of Deir el- Medina,
Leiden, NINO, 1997.
Kemp, All that Matters – B. Kemp, All that Matters: Ancient Egypt, London, John Murray Learning, 2015 (incl.
eBook ISBN 978 1 44418621 5).
Abbreviations
xiii
Kemp, Anatomy2 — B.J. Kemp, Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization, 2nd edn, London and New York,
Routledge, 2006.
Kemp, City – The City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti: Amarna and Its People, London, T&H, 2013.
Kemp, How to Read – B. Kemp, How to Read the Egyptian Book of the Dead, London, Granta, 2007.
Kemp and Garfi, Survey – B.J. Kemp and S. Garfi, A Survey of the Ancient City of El-‘Amarna, London,
EES, 1993.
Kemp and Stevens, Busy Lives – B. Kemp and A. Stevens, Busy Lives at Amarna: Excavations in the Main City
(Grid 12 and the House of Ranefer, N49.18), 2 vols, London, EES and Amarna Trust, 2010.
Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions – K.A. Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions: Historical and Biographical, 8 vols,
Oxford, Blackwell, 1968– 90.
Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) – K.A. Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions: Translated and Annotated, 7 vols,
Malden, MA/ Cambridge, MA, and Oxford, Wiley- Blackwell, 1993– 2014.
Kitchen, Third Intermediate – K.A. Kitchen, The Third Intermediate Period (1100– 650 bc), 3rd edn, Warminster,
A&P, 1995.
Kruchten, Horemheb – J.- M. Kruchten, Le décret d’Horemheb, Brussels, Université de Bruxelles, 1981.
Laboury, Akhénaton – D. Laboury, Akhénaton, Paris, Pygmalion, 2010.
Lacovara, Royal City – P. Lacovara, The New Kingdom Royal City, London and New York, KPI, 1997.
Landström, Ships – B. Landström, Ships of the Pharaohs: 4000 Years of Egyptian Shipbuilding, London, Allen
& Unwin, 1970.
Lauer, La pyramide – J.- Ph. Lauer, La pyramide à degés, 2 vols, Cairo, IFAO, 1936.
Leahy, Malkata – M.A. Leahy, Excavations at Malkata and the Birket Habu 1971– 1974. The Inscriptions,
Warminster, A&P, 1978.
Lehner, ‘Labor’ – M. Lehner, ‘Labor and the pyramids: the Heit el- Ghurab “Workers Town” at Giza.’
In P. Steinkeller and M. Hudson, eds, Labor in the Ancient World, vol. V, Dresden, ISLET- Verlag, 2015,
397– 522.
Lehner and Hawass, Giza – M. Lehner and Z. Hawass, Giza and the Pyramids, London, T&H, 2007.
Lichtheim, Literature – M. Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature: a Book of Readings, 3 vols, Berkeley, CA,
Los Angeles, CA, and London, UCP, 1973– 80.
Lozach and Hug, L’habitat – J. Lozach and G. Hug, L’habitat rural en Égypte, Cairo, IFAO and Société royale
de géographie d’Égypte, 1930.
McDowell, Jurisdiction – A.G. McDowell, Jurisdiction in the Workmen’s Community of Deir el- Medîna, Leiden,
NINO, 1990.
McDowell, Village Life – A.G. McDowell, Village Life in Ancient Egypt: Laundry Lists and Love Songs, Oxford
and New York, OUP, 1999.
Manniche, Colossi – L. Manniche, The Akhenaten Colossi of Karnak, Cairo and New York, AUC Press, 2010.
Manuelian, Studies – P. Der Manuelian, ed., Studies in Honor of William Kelly Simpson, 2 vols, Boston, MA,
MFA, 1996.
Martin, Royal Tomb – G.T. Martin, The Royal Tomb at El-‘Amarna, 2 vols, London, EES, 1974, 1989.
Mellink and Filip, Frühe Stufen – M.J. Mellink and J. Filip, Frühe Stufen der Kunst, Berlin, Propyläen
Verlag, 1974.
Midant- Reynes and Tristant, Origins – B. Midant- Reynes and Y. Tristant, eds, Egypt at Its Origins
2. Proceedings of the International Conference ‘Origin of the State, Predynastic and Early Dynastic Egypt’, Toulouse
(France), 5th– 8th September 2005, Leuven and Dudley, MA, Peeters, 2008.
Moeller, Urbanism – N. Moeller, The Archaeology of Urbanism in Ancient Egypt: from the Predynastic Period to
the End of the Middle Kingdom, New York, CUP, 2016.
Mond and Myers, Temples of Armant – Sir R. Mond and O.H. Myers, Temples of Armant, 2 vols, London,
EES, 1940.
Abbreviations
xiv
Moran, Amarna Letters – W.L. Moran, The Amarna Letters, Baltimore, MD, and London, Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992.
Muhs, Economy – B. Muhs, The Ancient Egyptian Economy, 3000–30 bce, Cambridge, CUP, 2016.
Murnane, Guide – W. Murnane, United with Eternity: a Concise Guide to the Monuments of Medinet Habu,
Chicago, IL, UCP and Cairo, AUC Press, 1980.
Murnane, Texts – W.J. Murnane, Texts from the Amarna Period in Egypt, Atlanta, GA, Society of Biblical
Literature, 1995.
Naville, XIth Dynasty Temple II – E. Naville, The XIth Dynasty Temple of Deir el- Bahari II, London, EEF, 1910.
Nelson and Hölscher, Work – H.H. Nelson and U. Hölscher, Work in Western Thebes 1931– 33, Chicago,
IL, UCP, 1934.
Nicholson and Shaw, Materials – P.T. Nicholson and I. Shaw, eds, Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology,
Cambridge, CUP, 2000.
O’Connor, ‘Geography of settlement’ – D.B. O’Connor, ‘The geography of settlement in ancient Egypt.’
In Ucko et al., Man, Settlement, 681– 5.
Papazian, Domain – H. Papazian, Domain of Pharaoh: the Structure and Components of the Economy of Old
Kingdom Egypt, Hildesheim, Gerstenberg, 2012.
Park and Greenberg, Finance – T.K. Park and J.B. Greenberg, The Roots of Western Finance: Power, Ethics, and
Social Capital in the Ancient World, Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2017.
Parkinson, Poetry and Culture – R.B. Parkinson, Poetry and Culture in Middle Kingdom Egypt; a Dark Side to
Perfection, London and New York, Continuum, 2002; London and Oakville, CT, Equinox, 2010.
Parkinson, Voices – R.B. Parkinson, Voices from Ancient Egypt: an Anthology of Middle Kingdom Writings,
London, BM, 1991.
Patch, Dawn – D.G. Patch, ed., Dawn of Egyptian Art, New York, MMA, 2011.
Peden, Historical Inscriptions – A.J. Peden, Egyptian Historical Inscriptions of the Twentieth Dynasty, Jonsered,
Paul Åströms Förlag, 1994.
Peden, Ramesses IV – A.J. Peden. The Reign of Ramesses IV, Warminster, A&P, 1994.
Peet, Rhind – T.E. Peet, The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus; British Museum 10057 and 10058, Liverpool,
University Press and London, Hodder & Stoughton, 1923.
Peet, Tomb- robberies – T.E. Peet, The Great Tomb- robberies of the Twentieth Egyptian Dynasty, Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1930.
Peet and Woolley, COA I – T.E. Peet and C.L. Woolley, The City of Akhenaten I, London, EES, 1923.
Pendlebury, COA III – J.D.S. Pendlebury, The City of Akhenaten III, 2 vols, London, EES, 1951.
Petrie, Abydos – W.M.F. Petrie, Abydos, 2 vols, London, EEF, 1902, 1903.
Petrie, Illahun – W.M.F. Petrie, Illahun, Kahun and Gurob, London, Nutt, 1891.
Petrie, Koptos – W.M.F. Petrie, Koptos, London, Quaritch, 1896.
Petrie, Palettes – W.M.F. Petrie, Ceremonial Slate Palettes and Corpus of Proto- dynastic Pottery, London,
BSAE, 1953.
Petrie, Royal Tombs I, II – W.M.F. Petrie, Royal Tombs of the First Dynasty, London, EEF, 1900; Royal Tombs of
the Earliest Dynasties, London, EEF, 1901.
Petrie and Quibell, Naqada – W.M.F. Petrie and J.E. Quibell, Naqada and Ballas, London, Quaritch, 1896.
Petrie et al., Lahun – W.M.F. Petrie, G. Brunton and M.A. Murray, Lahun II, London, BSAE and
Quaritch, 1923.
Piankoff, Litany – A. Piankoff, The Litany of Ra, New York, Bollingen Foundation, 1964.
Pinch, Votive Offerings – G. Pinch, Votive Offerings to Hathor, Oxford, GI, 1993.
Posener- Kriéger, Les archives – P. Posener- Kriéger, Les archives du temple funéraire de Néferirkare- Kakai (Les
Papyrus d’Abousir); Traduction et commentaire, Cairo, IFAO, 1976.
Posener- Kriéger, Mélanges Gamal Mokhtar – P. Posener- Kriéger, ed., Mélanges Gamal Eddin Mokhtar I, Cairo,
IFAO, 1985.
Abbreviations
xv
Posener- Kriéger and de Cenival, Abu Sir Papyri – P. Posener- Kriéger and J.L. de Cenival, Hieratic Papyri in
the British Museum. 5th series: The Abu Sir Papyri, London, BM, 1968.
Pritchard, Texts – J.B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts, Relating to the Old Testament, 3rd edn (with
Supplement), Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1969.
Quibell, Archaic Objects – J.E. Quibell, Catalogue général des antiquités égyptiennes du Musée du Caire: Archaic
Objects, Cairo, IFAO, 1904– 05.
Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II – J.E. Quibell and F.W. Green, Hierakonpolis II, London, Quaritch, 1902.
Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I – J.E. Quibell and W.M.F. Petrie, Hierakonpolis I, London, Quaritch, 1900.
Quirke, Administration – S. Quirke, The Administration of Egypt in the Late Middle Kingdom: the Hieratic
Documents, New Malden, SIA Publications, 1990.
Quirke, Exploring Religion – S. Quirke, Exploring Religion in Ancient Egypt, Chichester, Wiley, 2005.
Quirke, Lahun Studies – S. Quirke, ed., Lahun Studies, Reigate, Rubicon Press, 1998.
Ranke, Personennamen – H. Ranke, Die ägyptischen Personennamen, 3 vols, Glückstadt, Augustin, 1935– 76.
Ray, Reflections – J. Ray, Reflections of Osiris: Lives from Ancient Egypt, London, Profile, 2001.
Régen and Soukiassian, Gebel el- Zeit – I. Régen and G. Soukiassian, Gebel el- Zeit II. Le materiel inscrit.
Moyen- Empire– Nouvel Empire, Cairo, IFAO, 2008.
Reisner, Mycerinus – G.A. Reisner, Mycerinus: the Temples of the Third Pyramid at Giza, Cambridge, MA,
HUP, 1931.
Reymond, Mythical Origin – E.A.E. Reymond, The Mythical Origin of the Egyptian Temple, Manchester,
Manchester University Press and New York, Barnes & Noble, 1969.
Robichon and Varille, Temple primitif – C. Robichon and A. Varille, Description sommaire du temple primitif
de Médamoud, Cairo, IFAO, 1940.
Robins and Shute, Rhind – G. Robins and C. Shute, The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus: an Ancient Egyptian
Text, London, BM, 1987.
Rossi, Architecture – C. Rossi, Architecture and Mathematics in Ancient Egypt, Cambridge, CUP, 2004.
Ryholt, Political Situation – K.S.B. Ryholt, The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period
c. 1800– 1550 bc, Copenhagen, Museum Tusculanum Press, 1997.
Sandars, Sea Peoples – N.K. Sandars, The Sea Peoples: Warriors of the Ancient Mediterranean, revised edn,
London, T&H, 1985.
Schauer, Ungeplante Siedlungen – E. Schaur, Ungeplante Siedlungen/ Non- planned Settlements, Mitteilungen des
Instituts für Leichte Flächentragwerke, IL, Universität Stuttgart, 39, Stuttgart, Karl Krämer, 1992.
Schiff Giorgini et al., Soleb V – M. Schiff Giorgini, C. Robichon, J. Leclant and N. Beaux, Soleb V. Le temple,
bas- reliefs et inscriptions, Cairo, IFAO, 1998.
Schott, Kanais – S. Schott, Kanais. Der Tempel Sethos I. im Wâdi Mia, Göttingen, V&R, 1961.
Sethe, Lesestücke – K. Sethe, Ägyptische Lesestücke zum Gebrauch im akademischen Unterricht, Leipzig,
Hinrichs, 1928.
Seyfried, In the Light – F. Seyfried, ed., In the Light of Amarna. 100 Years of the Nefertiti Discovery, Berlin,
Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, 2012.
Shafer, Temples – B.E. Shafer, ed., Temples of Ancient Egypt, Ithaca, NY, CoUP, 1997.
Simpson, Heka- nefer – W.K. Simpson, Heka- nefer and the Dynastic Material from Toshka and Arminna, New
Haven, CT, Peabody Museum and Philadelphia, PA, University Museum, 1963.
Simpson, Literature – W.K. Simpson, ed., The Literature of Ancient Egypt: an Anthology of Stories, Instructions,
Stelae, Autobiographies, and Poetry, Cairo, AUC and Yale, CT, YUP, 2005.
Smith, Askut – S.T. Smith, Askut in Nubia: the Economics and Ideology of Egyptian Imperialism in the Second
Millennium bc, London and New York, Routledge International, 1995.
Smith and Redford, Project I – R.W. Smith and D.B. Redford, The Akhenaten Temple Project I, Warminster,
A&P, 1976.
Abbreviations
xvi
Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers – A. Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers: the Amarna Stone Village Survey, 2005– 2009,
2 vols, London, EES and Amarna Trust, 2012.
Stevens, Religion – A. Stevens, Private Religion at Amarna: the Material Evidence, Oxford, Oxbow, 2006.
Stevenson Smith, Art and Architecture – W. Stevenson Smith, The Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt, 3rd edn,
New Haven, CT, and London, YUP, 1998.
Stewart, Petrie Collection – H.M. Stewart, Egyptian Stelae, Reliefs and Paintings from the Petrie Collection, 3 vols,
Warminster, A&P, 1976, 1979, 1983.
Strudwick, Old Kingdom – N. and H. Strudwick, eds, Old Kingdom, New Perspectives: Egyptian Art and
Archaeology 2750– 2150 bc, Oxford and Oakville, CT, Oxbow, 2011.
Strudwick, Texts – N. Strudwick, Texts from the Pyramid Age, Leiden, Brill, 2005.
Teeter, Origins – E. Teeter, ed., Before the Pyramids: the Origins of Egyptian Civilization, Chicago, IL, UCP, 2011.
Tiradritti, Cairo Museum – F. Tiradritti, The Cairo Museum: Masterpieces of Egyptian Art, London, T&H, 1999.
Ucko et al., Man, Settlement – P.J. Ucko, R. Tringham and G.W. Dimbleby, eds, Man, Settlement and Urbanism,
London, Duckworth, 1972.
van den Boorn, Duties – G.P.G. van den Boorn, The Duties of the Vizier: Civil Administration in the Early
New Kingdom, London and New York, KPI, 1988.
van den Brink, Nile Delta – E.C.M. van den Brink, ed., The Nile Delta in Transition: 4th– 3rd Millennium bc,
Tel Aviv, van den Brink, 1992.
Vandersleyen, Das alte Ägypten – C. Vandersleyen, ed., Das alte Ägypten, Berlin, Propyläen Verlag, 1975.
van Dijk, Mouthful of Dust – J. van Dijk, ed., Another Mouthful of Dust: Egyptological Studies in Honour of
Geoffrey Thorndike Martin, Leuven, etc., Peeters, 2016.
Vercoutter, Mirgissa – J. Vercoutter, Mirgissa I, Paris, Mission archéologique française au Soudan, 1970.
Vernus, Affairs – P. Vernus, Affairs and Scandals in Ancient Egypt, Ithaca, NY, and London, CoUP, 2003.
Vogel, Festungen – C. Vogel, Ägyptische Festungen und Garnisonen bis zum Ende des Mittleren Reiches,
Hildesheim, Gerstenberg, 2004.
Vogel, Fortifications – C. Vogel, The Fortifications of Ancient Egypt 3000– 1780 bc, Oxford and New York,
Osprey, 2010.
Waddell, Manetho – W.G. Waddell, Manetho, London, Heinemann, 1948.
Warburton, State and Economy – D.A. Warburton, State and Economy in Ancient Egypt: Fiscal Vocabulary of the
New Kingdom, Freibourg, Universitätsverlag and Göttingen, V&R, 1997.
Weatherhead, Palace Paintings – F. Weatherhead, Amarna Palace Paintings, London, EES, 2007.
Wegner, Sunshade Chapel – J. Wegner, The Sunshade Chapel of Meritaten from the House- of- Waenre of Akhenaten,
Philadelphia, PA, University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, 2017.
Wente, Letters – E. Wente, Letters from Ancient Egypt, Atlanta, GA, Society of Biblical Literature, 1990.
Wildung, Rolle – D. Wildung, Die Rolle ägyptischer Könige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt I. Posthume Quellen
über die Könige der ersten vier Dynastien, Berlin, Hessling, 1969.
Wilkinson, Annals – T.A.H. Wilkinson, Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt: the Palermo Stone and Its Associated
Fragments, London and New York, KPI, 2000.
Wilkinson, Temples – R.H. Wilkinson, The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt, London, T&H, 2000.
Winlock, Models – H.E. Winlock, Models of Daily Life in Ancient Egypt, New York, MMA, 1955.
Zingarelli, Trade – A.P. Zingarelli, Trade and Market in New Kingdom Egypt: Internal Socio- economic Processes
and Transformations, Oxford, Archaeopress, 2010.
newgenprepdf
1
INTRODUCTION
The Invention of Consciousness: ‘In English we use the word “invention” in two ways. First, to
mean a new device or process developed by experimentation, and designed to fulfill a practical goal.
Second, to mean a mental fabrication, especially a falsehood, developed by art, and designed to please
or persuade. In this talk I’ll argue that human consciousness is an invention in both respects. First, it
is a cognitive faculty, evolved by natural selection, designed to help us make sense of ourselves and
our surroundings. But then, second, it is a fantasy, conjured up by the brain, designed to change the
value we place on our existence.’
Professor Nick Humphrey, announcement for a lecture at
Wolfson College, Cambridge, 13 May 2016
In the mid- 1980s the then history commissioning editor of Routledge, Andrew Wheatcroft, asked me to
write a general book about ancient Egypt, which I duly did. I recall a wish somehow to convey an angry
feeling that the story of ancient Egypt is simultaneously a record of human achievement in the distant past
and a pointer to a future failure of humanity – which is with us now – to face the destructive consequences
of many of those achievements. I would like history to be a record of the struggle to be free of the craving
for power already evident in the Bronze Age and subsequently twisted into even more awful shapes by
fierce creeds and strict ideologies. Progress is there, to be sure, but it is painfully slow, fitful and subject
to reversal. Rightness of cause, as seen across the us- versus- them divide, still ensnares too many minds.
‘Nationalism and tribalism and faith – these are the driving forces now, and they are tearing apart transnational
institutions all over the world.’1
Since, however, I had not been asked to write a polemic, my wish broke the surface only occasionally,
and the same remains true of this further revised edition. None the less, the longer view which archaeology
and ancient history affords does invite one to take stock of how humanity has been faring for the past five
thousand years. Remote though one’s studies might appear to be, they are of events and processes which
are parts of the continuum of which the current world is a product. Many deep- seated aspects of ancient
societies have proved to be remarkably enduring, changing their clothes as fashions have moved on so that
they ever seem a natural part of the contemporary landscape. They are mostly to do with collective identity
and sources of authority, and especially deserve to be held up to critical scrutiny, for they are often the least
benign parts of our inheritance.
In producing a revised edition for the second time I have tried to accomplish several things at once.
One is simply an update on discoveries and newer publications, though I have again been less thorough
Introduction
2
than I should like. Recent years have seen an outpouring of discoveries and studies that requires almost
full- time attention properly to embrace whilst, at the same time, my own priority has been continuing field
research at Tell el- Amarna (Amarna for short). For the first revision, I responded to a suggestion that the
later centuries be included as well, although this is not my speciality, but I have now (again in response to
outside suggestions) reverted to something closer to the original scheme. In consequence the book ends
with a separate chapter on Amarna.
Seen through the lens of culture
The opportunity to revise is also another stage in personal exploration (and thus something of a luxury),
an attempt to clarify the meaning of the studies upon which I have been engaged for over half a century.
I have found myself returning time and again to ask myself the question of just what, whether we study
ancient Egypt or our own present society, we are really looking at. I find a beginning in the most obvious
fact of all. Past and present, we are all – readers of this text and ancient Egyptians alike – members of the
same species, Homo sapiens, equipped with a brain that physically has remained unchanged since our species
emerged. Abundant written sources from ancient Egypt confirm the conclusion that we all share, and have
in the past shared, a common consciousness and substratum of unconscious behaviour. We all face the same
basic experience, that of existing as a uniquely important individual, looking out into a world that recedes
away from the circle of daily life to a wider society of common culture, to more distant and ‘foreign’ societies
lying beyond, all within the context of earth and heavens and the powers of luck, fate, destiny, the will
of supernatural (I would prefer to say imaginary) agents and, now that we have become conscious of them,
the immutable forces of scientific laws. We search for a theory of everything. Its components come mixed
up together, jostling for attention, and in thought and conversation we flit easily from one to another. We
live and keep our reason by virtue of the way that our minds select from the ceaseless flood of experiences
that crowd around and flow past us from birth to death and arrange what appears to be significant into
patterns. Those patterns, and the responses that we make – fleetingly in speech and more permanently
in the shape of institutions and monuments – are our culture. Culture begins as a mental therapy, a filter
passed to us from recent generations, to protect us from being overwhelmed by the information that our
senses collect, and through it we make sense of the world. On the one hand, therefore, I am trying to be
an objective observer, examining evidence from ancient Egypt as if I were a botanist looking at species of
ferns. Yet I can only make sense of the evidence by accepting that I myself am part of it, and how I join up
the fragments depends upon the fact that I am human, too, living within my own cultural sphere. There is
no clear and absolute answer as to where the line should be drawn between too much empathy and too
little.
One could argue that, since differences in personality and in local and temporal setting combine to
ensure that no two people are ever quite the same, there have been as many cultures as there have been
human beings. But in practice culture is a collective phenomenon. Its nature encourages generalization (in
which process we, as observers, are easily led to emphasize common features and to gloss over the extent to
which people develop their own personal views of the world). A characteristic of being human is a wish to
be part of a broader group with a distinctive identity, founded in language, religion, citizenship, guild, local
society and so on. Moreover, through hearsay and some of the written and visual signals of culture people
imagine that they belong not only to the community which surrounds them but also to a broader ‘people’
or ‘nation’ which defines itself, at least in part, by how different it appears to be from others. Shared identity
is one of the most powerful and alluring sources of mental order. It provides a ready- made answer to
the question: who am I? It also provides a basis for separating myself as observer from the people who are
the object of my study. Chapter 1 explores for ancient Egypt what that collective identity was, attempting
to separate culture from ethnicity.
Introduction
3
Creative minds within the community strengthen the bonds of identity by the exercise of the imagination.
They invent (though it might seem at the time to be revelation) myths, symbols and ideologies which
are, in their time, essential knowledge. Ambitious individuals create from the framework a basis of power,
establishing systems of conduct which direct the energies and resources of others. The history of the world
is not an account of the development of innumerable pools of merging cultures and points of consciousness.
It is the record of the subjugation of people to polities of increasing size, ambition and complexity,
sometimes with and sometimes without their consent.
The instrument of subjugation is hierarchy, or more precisely dominance hierarchy. This sustains a way
of life in which people commonly have unequal access to resources and unequal degrees of authority over
others. The balancing mechanism is deference. Deference is an inbuilt scale of sensitivities through which
many people find satisfaction in serving those whom they see are more powerful than themselves whilst,
at the same time, accepting the services of those less powerful. Deference also, however, co- exists with
its opposite, angry rejection of subservience. Dominance hierarchy is common in nature. It is present to
different degrees amongst primates, although it is not an automatic consequence of complexity amongst
living things. It can be contrasted with a common way of life amongst (for example) ant colonies, in which
self- organization or self- management of work arrangements is prominent, allowing worker ants to be, in
their varied tasks, interchangeable with one another.2 Despite what is common in primate societies, for the
greater part of the time that fully evolved humans have lived (at least 200,000 years) dominance hierarchy
probably barely existed. In their hunter- gatherer groups (of a few dozen individuals) it was (to judge from
studies of surviving societies of this kind) kept in check through various forms of sanction that achieved
socio- political levelling and thus a way of life in which some measure of equality prevailed.3 Moreover,
the way we give priority to the wielding of power in studies of the past (and present) tends to obscure
the power of self- organization which developed human societies also possess. An example (the building
of Amarna) will be explored in Chapter 8, which is to be contrasted with settlements where the shape
expresses hierarchy (Chapter 5 is largely about examples from the Middle Kingdom).
Signs in the archaeological record of the Near East that groups were breaking away from self- restraint,
allowing dominance hierarchies to establish themselves, begin to appear in the ninth millennium BC (though
considerably later in Egypt, seemingly by as much as four thousand years). Once started, the process – still
the subject of much speculation – reinforces itself almost irreversibly. Individuals appreciate the scope that
exists for ever grander ambitions and, in a time that is short by the timescale of prehistory and human
evolution, states begin to appear. States entrench dominance hierarchies not only through the wielding
of coercive power but also through the development of specialist groups to whom the power of sanction
is delegated: scribes, priests, soldiers and so on. Most inhabitants of a state thus take their place within a
system of varied opportunities. The state provides both the most practical framework within which we can
study culture, and is, at the same time, one of the most conspicuous aspects of culture. The nature of the
ancient Egyptian state and its wealth of devices – myth, symbol and institution – to manipulate minds and
to direct the lives of its people are at the centre of this book.
In this way also the lives and views of a whole population are reduced to a singularity. This serves as
a great convenience to all, including ourselves when looking at ancient Egypt. In treating them as a bloc
we can say ‘the ancient Egyptians did this’, or we can move to a personification of the kind: ‘Egypt in the
New Kingdom expanded her empire’ (though never ‘his empire’, at least in the English language). What
is at work here is the style of thinking that is unique to Homo sapiens: the perspective- taking capacity of
the imagination – the ability inwardly to see oneself as an observer of people who are primarily held only
within the mind and can be generalized to the point of singularity – and its boundless ability to invent.
Together they allow for people, things and abstract concepts to be incorporated within an imaginary world
in which they have a role which gives them attributes beyond whatever can be immediately sensed. They
have, more precisely, a transcendental role.4
Introduction
4
The transcendental potential of the imagination creates kings from dominant individuals; and not only
kings but the abstract concept of kingship, explored and expressed through myth and performance and
providing the concept of ‘legitimacy’, which in turn allows individuals less personally given to dominating
others to succeed to the office of king, so helping the maintenance of an orderly society. It creates states
and nations from agglomerations of people, and priests from persons who act in a particular way in a shrine
(and who, when not doing this, might, at least in ancient Egypt, be a neighbour with whom one otherwise
has normal dealings). Each king, each state, each priest is something which gathers in the imagination colourful
and ornate characteristics which convey the respect, even awe, inherent within deference. Moreover,
in the imagination these generalized groups can act out dramas, narratives in which dynasties rise and fall
and battle honours are exchanged. It helps if named individuals are present, but archaeologists, like social
scientists, are used to creating narratives about groups of people who are defined, not by names or personalities,
but by their place in society, something which again transcends their individual characteristics.
Generalizing allows dialogue to occur. It also obscures an awkward truth. Variety is an intrinsic part
of organic life, in appearance and, when it is present, in consciousness. It provides cats with individual
characters, makes political trends hard to analyse and predict, polarizes society on occasion and guarantees
that every orthodoxy produces its heresies. The inconsistency, compromise, overlap and fuzzy boundaries
that are inherently present in human thinking can be covered up but not suppressed. That covering- up
need not be purposely done. The development of a dominant narrative – such as we find in ancient Egypt
centred on Pharaoh and his subjects – can unconsciously have the same effect.
Seen through the lens of knowledge: theories of everything
Narratives built around transcendental roles carry us into the realm of myth and thus into the nature of
knowledge. We live by myth and should not regard it as standing in opposition to rational knowledge. Myth
and rational knowledge overlap when we use phrases like ‘I am generally aware of ’, ‘I have a smattering of
knowledge of ’, and try to explain to others (assuming we are not experts) how genes and chromosomes
work or what is the nature of electricity. Many of the facts are likely to be wrong, some of the elements
misunderstood, and the general picture woefully incomplete. What matters to the teller is that it has the
shape of a story and that is what myth really is. Myth is the more obviously story- telling form of what is
otherwise metaphor. It pervades the sciences although its presence in a particular form is often not wholly
apparent until it has been discarded. The history of the sciences reveals how the imagination includes the
essential ability to produce knowledge which, in retrospect, is provisional. It meets the expectations of
researchers for a time, but is later seen to be incomplete or even false in the light of further observation and
thinking. What are those discarded explanations but myths? Much of what we think we know is provisional
and relies upon our remarkable capacity to join up fragments, find patterns and turn them into stories. Lack
of observational knowledge is no hindrance, for invention and myth- making seamlessly fill the gaps. ‘Belief ’
is the acceptance of provisional or unverifiable knowledge.
If I am truthful with myself much of my knowledge of my special field – Egyptology – is of this kind.
The sources that I work with are tangible things, ‘facts’. They are tombstones in museums, pictures on
temple walls, drawings of excavated pots. How they fit into a sensible set of explanations, however, requires
a huge amount of creative infilling now embodied in traditions of understanding, nurtured in university
departments, which have been growing for more than two centuries. My ancient Egypt remains, none the
less, very much an imagined world, though I hope that it is, like a marquee in a wind, pegged to the ground
at many points. The pegs in the case of this book are the endnotes which relate my statements to a large
body of literature which stores factual information and often instructions as to where, in a museum or at an
archaeological site, the original source is to be found. This is the crucial difference between what we might
term ‘rational myth’ – my ludicrously inadequate working- knowledge of nuclear physics, or my better
informed but still largely speculative account of, say, the workings of the ancient Egyptian economy – and
Introduction
5
myth based wholly in the mind, on thought experiments. The history of thought has been of an increasing
multiplication of myths, mostly of the former kind, allowing us to choose amongst them, and so giving us
the power to discard those that we find inappropriate.
In its craving for knowledge (and thus for complexity of thought) the human mind fills itself with a
mix of what is verifiable (e.g. the cost of a goat that is based upon personal dealings with neighbours and
in the marketplace; the repeatable experience that, if one follows instructions in a manual of arithmetic
concerning the distribution of rations (pp. 177–8), the result is always the same) and what is not but is
accepted anyway. This latter is the category of weird knowledge (or magical knowledge) – ‘the illusion
of something with extraordinary otherworldly properties’5 – which simultaneously is the price we pay
for having, through evolution, developed consciousness, and is the source of our inspirations and goals.
In this category comes knowledge of ‘the gods’, the identification and usually the naming of the parts
of a universe which exists within the imagination and is the response to the feeling that the ‘world is
in fact not what it appears to be, but behind the world of appearances there lies a reality utterly unlike
the world of our senses’.6 What ‘the gods’ are is not the same across cultures. Perhaps a definition which
recognizes the one thing they have in common is ‘imaginary beings to which people ascribe extraordinary
properties’.7
In developing an understanding of their world Egyptians with an enquiring mind considered its constituent
elements. What did and what did not possess an animating force? ‘Divine’ is a common modern
translation of a key word but does not properly correspond to ancient experience, which could, for example,
apply the word to the many elements, visible and invisible, of which a human individual was composed, and
also to parts of the landscape (e.g. the eastern and western deserts; see below, p. 321). A healer, when preparing
to confront an illness, instead of asking for help from the gods, for the moment assumed the identity
of some of the most powerful of them in order to make effective threats against the demons of disease. It
was as if the realm of the ‘divine’ were an invisible medium which all Egyptians occupied and which they
easily shared with gods and the natural world. Over all knowledge and experience loomed the unstable
balance between order and disorder, between justice and fairness and their opposites. In the absence of
a more analytical style of thinking which was enriched by sceptical observation of the natural world (it
would appear in Greece in the sixth century BC) the Egyptians had little more than the creative power of
their imagination. Over the course of three thousand years, in a search for complexity in understanding,
they invented richly detailed but fanciful knowledge of the elements of which the universe was composed,
and ways in which people could interact with it.
There is a widespread modern view, sometimes illustrated by pie- charts or in the pages of atlases, that
the world and its population can be classified according to religion. It reflects the notion, which is of fairly
recent origin, that ‘world religions’ is an important field of study.8 It can, moreover, be extended into the
past, even to ancient Egypt, where ‘ancient Egyptian religion’ takes its place in a kind of genealogical tree
of religions. The subject was initially defined by Christian thinking and then easily developed to embrace
Islam. The concept works less well when the net is spread further, particularly to East Asia. What the
components of ‘world religions’ have in common is that they offer a path of understanding, a route to
knowledge of the self and to the world as a whole. But so do many other paths, from academic pursuits
(even Egyptology) to ideas that attract the term ‘alternative’, their provability by logic and observation
ranging from zero to the maximum point on the scale (with Egyptology somewhere in between; I hope
towards the high- scoring end).
The common habit, to which I have been prey for much of my life, is to put the ancient Egyptians’
path (or paths) of understanding under the heading ‘religion’. ‘Religion’ at first sight seems to be a useful
descriptive category, one drawer in a cabinet of classification which holds all of human experience. Yet it
is difficult to avoid imbuing the word religion, as well as related words such as faith, belief, piety, spirituality
and, of course, their opposites, such as superstition and blasphemy, with values that arise from two
millennia of life within an official belief system (Christianity) that was, for a long time, forcefully imposed.
Introduction
6
The energetic promotion of religion for so long has conditioned us to give to its vocabulary (the terms
of which presume that the reader shares with the writer a similar deferential feeling towards gods) a particular
weight which hinders rational consideration of people like the Egyptians who strove to attain
understanding without feeling that they were following a special path. Religion, like so many concepts,
can gain in clarity of definition when set against opposites, such as the pairings: religion/ atheism, ‘true’
religion/ ‘false’ religion. But when such opposing modes of thought are absent (as was the case in ancient
Egypt) ‘religion’ becomes almost synonymous with ‘life’. Why burden oneself with unnecessary terminology?
Moreover, the gods that a person recognized – including one’s local god, one’s ‘city god’ – were not
a strong part of their identity, of the kind that divided one person from another whose imaginative configuration
was not the same. Another person’s preferences amongst the gods did not create an ‘otherness’.
Yet this is the characteristic that most marks ‘religions’ as they subsequently developed and is, on its own, a
reason for not defining an Egyptian religion.
The unhelpfulness of conventional vocabulary surfaces in another way. Studies of many modern societies,
through census returns and questionnaires, claim that religion (at least in ‘western’ societies) is waning
or declining. But it is not declining into a vacuum of the imagination, which is where religion has its home.
It is dissolving into myriad fragments of personal knowledge, in part collected from rational, including
scientific, education and in part from the inventions of people’s consciousness. In its place is an increasing
diffusion of ideas as to what (outside human agency, if anything at all) governs existence and to whom or
to what one should offer deference other than idealized or transcendent fellow humans. It is a search for
a theory of everything, of which ‘religion’ is one version (and this book is my version). The perceptions
of the ancient Egyptians were similarly composed, but drawn from a far more limited pool of possibilities,
necessarily so because they lived much further back along the path of development of human consciousness
and of the creative powers of the imagination.
Ancient Egypt was also part of the world in which monotheism developed. Monotheism is still very
much with us. If you accept its central tenet it creates an evolutionary path into which ancient Egypt can be
fitted.9 The figure of King Akhenaten stands out as particularly significant (Chapter 8). The path proceeds
from the incomplete revelation of ‘false gods’ to the truth of a single god defined in a particular way and
by a particular group. But other paths developed in the ancient world which eventually were eclipsed by
monotheism, but never really went away and have gradually come back and now largely shape people’s
outlook. They, too, can be seen as ancestral to parts of the broad spread of contemporary personal quests
for understanding. One is illustrated by the teaching of the Greek philosopher Epicurus (342– 270 BC),
known mostly from a long poetic discourse, On the Nature of Things, in Latin, of a Roman follower of his
philosophy, Titus Lucretius Carus, who is thought to have died around 55 BC. Epicurus accepted that gods
existed, as a natural phenomenon and an integral part of the universe, a universe composed of nothing
but atoms and voids. They were, however, remote and wholly lacking interest in humans. According to the
Epicurean view, ‘religion’ (Lucretius uses the word religio) referred not to belief in gods. That was to be
taken for granted. Religion defined human behaviour when, vainly thinking that gods had an interest in
people, humans sought to communicate with them and, by means of sacrifice, to influence their actions.
(The word ‘religion’, used in this way, was thus what we might term ‘cult’.) Epicureans saw this as foolish
and degrading. Moreover, they subscribed to the broadly held view in the classical world that the universe
was governed by an interplay of two forces, Love and Strife. ‘Both, it would seem, are necessary for the
world to flourish: without Love there would be no coherence or continuity, without Strife no activity or
new creation. So Love and Strife need to be in balance or harmony. But the universe as a totality needs
to cohere, and so the sum of things, we may infer, is the prevailing of Love over Strife.’10 The philosophy
of Epicurus offered the individual a path towards greater understanding based upon close observation of
the world, including natural phenomena, and through discussion with like- minded friends in pleasurable
surroundings. Its elitist outlook limited its appeal, so that it is only since the Renaissance that it has quietly
taken its place in mainstream culture, at least in the ‘west’.11 It is instructive that, although Epicurians
Introduction
7
accepted the existence of gods, they are regarded as followers of a philosophy and not of a religion.
Their polite acceptance that the gods existed but were powerless cleared the field for a rational universe.
Omnipotent gods make this more difficult.
For the ancient Egyptians the gods were also elements of knowledge of the universe. In some texts the
Egyptians display an attitude of ironic distance from them. Moreover, the great theme of Egyptian thinking
was how the universe stood on the edge of disorder but was saved by the achievement of harmony between
its opposing forces, an earlier version (in a different cultural setting) of the opposition between Love and
Strife. Although the Egyptians seem not to have had the intellectual clarity of classical philosophers they
were mapping a pathway towards acceptance that the universe could be described by naming its parts,
which followed cycles of action and reaction in which humans played no part, except in so far as they
could, by their personal behaviour, influence the balance between chaos and order. One of the sets of parts
which the Egyptians imagined comprised the irreducible elements of the universe took the form of four
pairs (male and female) of abstractions. These were given collectively a name which must mean something
like ‘the Eight Eternals’,12 and for which only tentative translations are possible, as with ‘timelessness, inertness,
insubstantiality and blackness’; or even simply ‘no time, no energy, no mass, no light’, the conditions
that cosmologists now ascribe to what preceded the ‘big- bang’ creation of the universe.13 The male aspects
were accompanied by a picture of a frog and the females by a picture of a snake. Elements in the writings
point to an underlying concept of wateriness. They came into existence within an imagined initial state,
‘primaeval time’, by means of a single act of creation by a creator god, Shu (sunlight as it passes through
the air). As a piece of abstract speculation on the origin of matter it should command some respect, even
though its categories do not coincide with anyone else’s, including our own. This impersonal universe had
a blurry overlap (which tends to confuse us) with imagined but approachable spirits of particular localities
which slowly developed into places which drew in major resources to support a cult (some examples are
given in Chapter 3).
Half of the content of religion is knowledge (a theory of everything) which, with hindsight (as in the
case of ourselves regarding ancient Egypt) or from the perspective of the outsider, has emerged wholly
within the imagination. The other half is deference, a psychological determinant of dominance hierarchies
and evidently what Lucretius had in mind when using the word religio. It manifests itself in responses to
the feeling of awe when in the presence of superior authority, which is partly visible (kings) and partly in
the imagination (gods). With those two concepts – knowledge and deference – the subject area of ‘religion’
(for which the Egyptians themselves had no word) becomes redundant. ‘To explain religion is therefore
a fundamentally misguided enterprise. It is rather like trying to explain the function of headlights while
ignoring what motor cars are like and for.’14 And so another change in this revised edition is that I have
abandoned the word ‘religion’ for pre- modern contexts and have been careful in the use of related words.
One of them is ‘ritual’. In the words of one anthropologist: ‘ “What use does a term [ritual] have which
brings together a man shaking hands, a man praying to his god, a man refusing to walk under a ladder, a
man clapping at the end of a concert, a man placing medicine on his crops?” As there is almost nothing
which such a category would reliably exclude, we can only agree that the answer is, “None at all”.’15
I do not deny that the Egyptians experienced what is conventionally called religion; far from it. But
if one wants to understand the nature of consciousness and its history starting as far back as one can (and
ancient Egypt offers some of the world’s earliest direct sources), then ‘religion’ is an unhelpful partition to
introduce into the continuum of knowledge; it is an obstacle and a distraction.
Seen through the lens of human agency
When looking at human societies, behind our imagined views of them, our extreme generalizations and
the stories that historians compose, there lies a reality that is altogether very hard to come to terms
with: the endless variety that generalizations obscure. A society is a system composed of all of its people,
Introduction
8
in the case of ancient Egypt somewhere between one and three million of them. As people they are individuals
and within the system they are agents, each and every one, living within a matrix of opportunities
for interaction. Yet no two are exactly the same, they are not equal performers. If we take one of the
simplest physical attributes, body height, and plot a graph for how it varies in a population, we will find
that most people’s heights will group together towards the centre of the graph, but that increasingly fewer
people will have heights which register further and further towards the taller and shorter extremes. The
graph will shape itself like the profile of a bell. What is true for height is true for everything else, from
assertiveness to resistance to illness, from intelligence to athletic prowess, from being motivated more by
altruism or by selfishness (although it seems in this case that the ‘bell’ is skewed more towards the positive
attribute of altruism). Each person is situated at a particular point on an innumerable array of curves which
describe different human characteristics. Moreover, from population to population the norms themselves
vary, whether they concern body height or willingness to die in a cause, and within the same population
some degree of variation is to be expected over time and as circumstances change. In considering the
themes of this book, an important variable is interest in complexity within the mind. In some people a
mixture of exploration and invention creates complex explanations for the nature of their existence; in
others less so or hardly at all.
With each individual possessed of a unique set of attributes, people act out their lives within their
opportunity space, at the very least with the purpose of survival and often of improvement to their lot.
They unwittingly exchange illnesses, they communicate information, from gossip to revelations, they seek
to emerge with satisfaction from a transaction, even if that transaction consists only of getting across a point
of view. It is something one cannot avoid: lying low and attempting to do nothing is itself an act with
repercussions, especially if many people choose that course. Yet that matrix of opportunities for interaction –
normal human life for a population – is far from being an even field. People are born into family groups
which are themselves lesser systems and which, over the years, waver between increasing their standing and
their property as a unit and subdividing again into new families, sometimes through disputes. The process
tends to be self- cancelling. One family’s promotion is likely to be at the expense of another’s decline so that
a general degree of equilibrium maintains itself, but sets of circumstances arise – good fortune for those
involved – which propel one family beyond normal expectations to a more longer- lasting prominence, perhaps
even, in traditional societies, to the founding of a ruling house. Those few individuals in which, say, the
urge to excel and dominate is unusually strong (Rameses II perhaps, and, of course, Akhenaten), will have a
measurable effect on the system as a whole and might, for a brief time, drive it in a new direction or beyond
its previous boundaries. But the system remains, albeit in an altered state, preserved through memory and
cultural tradition. Families are only one kind of lesser system, and perhaps more influential in the past than
now. Institutions are another kind, and ancient Egypt possessed many. Most conspicuous (to us) were the
royal court, the many temples and, in the later centuries, the army. They take a prominent place in Chapter 6.
But also of great importance in the lives of many, especially in the earlier periods, were patriarchal families
based in provincial centres who at least outwardly articulated the combination of local authority and moral
responsibility for their communities. The heads of such families often identified themselves with titles which
we translate as ‘mayor’ or ‘nomarch’ (nome being a Greek word for a unit of provincial government).
As the full population of the country constantly interacts, the system which they inhabit does not remain
stable, as if it were a pot of water endlessly simmering on a low heat. It develops complex swirls of activity
that, described at an instant of time, form the profile of that society. When followed over time, changes in
the system’s configuration are seen to feed back and become in turn influential, to tiny or to large extents,
producing self- reinforcing trends. We first see it in Egypt in the emergence of the state towards the end
of the fourth millennium BC (Chapter 2). Certain patterns recur, but not in a way that is wholly predictable.
Collective behaviour, which becomes history as the years pass, takes a non- linear course. Causality
becomes hard to follow. If we keep to the metaphor of the simmering pot and substitute oil for the water,
and turn up the heat, we will see the oil develop structure, in the form of visible hexagon- shaped flows
Introduction
9
which disperse the heat more rapidly. Those structures have their human counterparts in changes in belief
and behaviour that usually come to our attention only by the time that they are fully formed and their
genesis is lost.
How a mass of individuals interacts within a system in a way that becomes a fragment of history is
apparent in modern stock markets in which, day by day, many thousands of transactions are made, each
involving an element of judgement by the human actors or agents (or by computer- based algorithms
constructed to follow their logic). Moods of confidence and uncertainty are the self- reinforcing factors. On
seeing that many others are buying or are selling in a determined way, an individual is very likely to join
them. In consequence of such herding behaviour, broad movements in favour of expansion alternate with
broad movements in favour of contraction, the oddly named ‘bull’ and ‘bear’ markets. The stock market
is measured daily in a single way, through the value of the individual stocks and of the companies whose
credibility they represent, so it is possible to model and to simulate it with computer programs which
incorporate the mathematics of complex non- linear systems.
Why is this not done for contemporary society as a whole? To have an adequate working model, constantly
updated, ought to be hugely useful to social scientists, to politicians and to people who sell things.
In the years that have passed since I wrote the first version of this Introduction the shadowy outline of
such a scheme of universal monitoring has begun to appear as people have voluntarily linked themselves
to networks of electronic communication (and become subject to involuntary schemes of monitoring).
One publicly acknowledged scheme of archiving is that of the Library of Congress of the USA, which
announced in 2013 that approximately 170 billion public ‘tweets’ had already been collected; around
400 million new ones are said to be created each day.16
Through this quantity of source material (doubtless to be extended and enhanced as time passes) will
the focus of history writing alter? Contemplating just the possibility brings home how, for the more distant
past, history cannot be anything other than a colossal approximation, a crude puppet- show. This does not
prevent it from being both instructive and enjoyable, but it is important not to lose sight of the fact that
the more we choose a narrative style of history, locate heroes and villains, identify causes and generally tell
a good story, the more we veer towards soap opera and away from contemplating the infinitely complex
human biomass that is a society and that is, in reality, almost beyond our reach.
Perversity and disorder
Embedded within the myriad points of consciousness which lie at the heart of a population is the one
factor which makes any study of human behaviour, whether it is ancient history or the modern stock
market, so resistant to precise modelling and prediction even if we are armed with adequate data. That
factor is perversity, the human manifestation of the tendency of the universe towards disorder. Whilst one
direction of human endeavour is towards inhabiting a stable system – a cosy home in a harmonious community
under a benign government, at every level a triumph of order over chaos – it stands constantly
in tension with jagged moments or long- nurtured schemes of rejection. In most parts of the world the
past five thousand years is a documented record of perversity and conflict. It has not been just the clash of
armies. Fears of disorder and of alienation in a hostile world were a theme of thoughtful ancient Egyptian
literature as far back as the early third millennium BC,17 and from time to time Egyptian society took on a
more fragmented mode which promoted internal conflict. These are the so- called Intermediate Periods of
ancient Egyptian history. In the end what remained of Egyptian culture was not destroyed by conquerors
but from within. In the early centuries ad enthusiastic Egyptian adherents of Christianity rejected their
cultural inheritance altogether (by that time a mix of the Pharaonic and the Greek) and celebrated, in tales
to encourage the faithful, the smashing up and burning of what survived of old knowledge and places of
cult. Indeed, what mostly characterizes the history of humanity as a whole since the Neolithic is the conscious
search for improved systems, and their simultaneous or subsequent compromise and even rejection.
Introduction
10
People are forever seeking to wreck and dismantle what others have built up or even what they themselves,
in another mood, will approve of. Triumphs bring mockery, the tragedies of others provoke relish, and
iconoclasm destroys what others revere. It is not a simple cleavage into good and evil, for it is perversity
which equally undermines inhumane and unpleasant systems. And it is through dissatisfaction that innovation
arises.
What long- term function does contrary behaviour serve? Why are people so perverse? The creation of
orderly regimes has been a regular aim of government since very early times, and it is very noticeable in
ancient Egyptian sources (Chapters 4 and 5 deal with this). Why then are we not more ant- like than ants
themselves? That many people evidently find the idea of a safe, ordered but at the same time controlled
existence unwholesome only underlines the puzzle: why do we not like the idea of living an ordered and
perhaps very comfortable hive- like existence?18 In the long run, it seems, complacency is an unsustainable
condition, and hard- won stability an abhorrence. When a time of tribulation has passed, people grow
bored with consensus and prosperity. One answer comes from within the scientific community. There is a
view that the ‘purpose’ of all activity including that of life itself is to disperse the universe’s energy towards
an ever greater number of possible states, in effect towards uniformity, and that complex ways do this ever
more effectively. Life steers itself towards ever more ambitious combinations of turbulence and complexity
which yet require at the same time the constraints of order against which to react. This is the great paradox
of existence. Everything provokes its opposite; everything needs its opposite in order to survive.
What is meant by energy when spoken of in the context of human societies and their history? We might
think first of the more intensive production of food than would happen in nature and the use of natural
resources generally; the creation of societies in which material expectations rise and population numbers
increase so that the levels of exploitation also rise in turn; the picking on weaker neighbours, especially
when, from the ashes of war, societies are renewed. But underlying them all is perversity itself, the wish for
change born from dissatisfaction with the old and the attraction of something new. Over the past two thousand
years the most powerful releasers of energy have been bodies of newly formulated knowledge which
excite extreme deference to real and imagined figures (tyrants and gods) and which are simultaneously
destructive and creative, which wreck an old order and seek to build a new one in its place.
Thoughtful Egyptians, very early in their history, seem to have appreciated this endemic tension in the
world as they saw it (it is the basis of Chapter 2). The theme of order versus chaos is embedded within
Egyptian thinking and produced some startling written portrayals of chaos let loose in the world. Within
their universe order and chaos faced each other. Yet even though chaos had its myriad demons, everything
was constrained towards an underlying harmony which affected mankind (mostly Egyptian ‘mankind’)
through an acceptance that social ordering was part of the scheme, an aspect which was transferable to
daily life and involved the role of the king. In the end, order – the Egyptian concept of maat – prevails and
stands in the place of unrule and so the outlook is optimistic.19 A phrase from the philosophy of science,
‘systems standing on the edge of chaos’, well describes the Egyptian world- view. Again, emphasizing the
need to separate the symbolic language (which we are bound to find strange) from content, this seems
to be a reasonable working model to have at the back of one’s mind in contemplating what goes on in
the world.
Reduced to this absolute level history becomes a tale of increasingly flamboyant ways by means of
which energy is dispersed. If the outcome were to be wholly destructive then that end would be thwarted.
Sufficient of what has evolved and developed must survive to allow the play – gaming is a powerful metaphor
here – to move on and to rise to levels of ever greater complexity. A positive outcome of some sort
is inherent in the process. It is thus entirely normal that society as a whole should experience progress, and
equally normal that disruption and setback should be an inescapable accompaniment. The problem for the
historian is that the preliminaries to times of change – they are not really ‘causes’ – lie almost wholly unrecorded
within populations whose societies serve as the playing field on which moods and ideas, opportunities
and reactions to external factors endlessly compete for winning energy- consuming outcomes. We,
Introduction
11
as observers, arrive after each particular game has reached its end and know only the result and the names
of a few players but not the myriad details of the play itself. One can sometimes pick out what seem to be
causes for moments of drama – the ending of the Old Kingdom in Egypt is an example
– but these can
only be simplifications of quickening alterations in the patterns in which energy is being dispersed by the
population as a whole. In this case perhaps a long stability was moving towards inertia and, in a reaction
spontaneously taking shape, in the minds of sufficient people a preference developed for a more dynamic
kind of society, in this case one which replaced a single central government with competing local centres of
patriarchal authority, so bringing about armed conflict (which was, in effect, a re- run of the process of state
formation). Thus is the First Intermediate Period described, its release of energy at the local level having
as one local consequence the expansion of some towns, a picture not in accord with past assessments of
the time which focus on ‘collapse’.20 No matter how elegant our construction of how the events played
out in the fine details of who did what, the underlying reason why history took its particular course is that
the background mood was in a state to respond in a particular way; the time was right. Fantasies of violent
change are wired into the human mind, yet most calls to arms fall flat because the time is not right, and
most prophets and would- be rulers of the world pass their lives unheeded. A complete history would be
one which explains why an infinite number of possible outcomes did not happen.
Summary of content
In the scheme I have chosen, the first part (Chapters 1– 3) serves to introduce the ancient Egyptians and
the processes by which their culture and their state came into being. In essence it is a narrative of conflict
resolution. The second part (Chapters 4 and 5) examines the processes at work which expressed an urge
towards refining the degree of order that had already been achieved within society. It is about conscious
efforts to improve the means of control. The third part (Chapters 6– 8), by drawing largely on evidence
from the New Kingdom, explores the complex balance that was achievable, when energies were directed
peacefully towards refashioning the state and violently towards the conquest of neighbours. Chapter 8 also
highlights the brief rule of Pharaoh Akhenaten who was driven by a wish – perverse in its time – to think
critically about the central model of the universe that the Egyptians had developed.
I have wanted to convey the scope that frequently is there for more than one interpretation of the evidence,
and what the limits are to the inferences that we can draw. And, in seeing myself as more an archaeologist
than any other kind of enquirer, I have tried to make archaeological sources speak a little more
loudly than they often do in books about ancient Egypt. Some will find the result idiosyncratic. But all
should bear in mind the likelihood that survey and excavation in Egypt will continue indefinitely to bring
in new archaeological evidence, especially evidence for the histories of local communities. By contrast,
seeing how the rate of discovery of new written sources declined sharply during the twentieth century, the
current stock might well represent most of what we will ever have.
The Egyptian setting in space and time
Egypt’s civilization developed in one of the largest arid desert areas in the world, larger than the whole of
Europe. It was possible only because of the River Nile, which crosses an almost rainless desert from south
to north carrying the waters of Lake Victoria nearly 7,000 km (just over 4,000 miles) to the Mediterranean
Sea. In ancient times Egypt was just the last 1,100 km (700 miles) of this waterway, the stretch that begins
at modern Aswan and the set of rapids known as the First Cataract. Along most of this course the Nile has
scoured a deep and wide gorge in the desert plateau, and then built on its floor a thick layer of rich dark
silt. It is this deep carpet of silt which has given the valley its astonishing fertility and transformed what
might have been a geological curiosity, a version of the Grand Canyon, into a densely populated agricultural
country.
Introduction
12
The Nile valley proper ends in the vicinity of Cairo, capital of Egypt since the Arab invasion of AD 641.
To the north the river flows out from the valley into a large bay in the coastline, now entirely choked with
the same rich silt, to form a wide, flat delta over which the river meanders in two branches, the Damietta
on the east and the Rosetta on the west. In earlier times the branches numbered more than two. The delta
now represents about two- thirds of the total arable land in Egypt. The striking twofold division into valley
and delta creates a natural boundary for administration particularly when viewed from Cairo or its ancient
forebear, the city of Memphis. The ancient Egyptians recognized this by giving to each part a distinctive
name and treating them as if they had once been independent kingdoms. These names are conventionally
translated as ‘Upper Egypt’ for the valley, and ‘Lower Egypt’ for the delta.
This is, however, an oversimplification. Upper Egypt has its own internal division in the vicinity of
Asyut. This is apparent partly from observing the course of history, which has tended to reveal this division
at times of internal weakness, and partly from topography. North of Asyut the west bank becomes broader,
the western cliffs fade into a low escarpment, and the land is watered not only by the main course of the
river but also by a winding parallel offshoot, the Bahr Yusef (Figure 0.1). Because of its distinctive character
the term ‘Middle Egypt’ is often used for the valley north of Asyut. The delta is topographically much more
of a unity, but nevertheless tends to be seen by its inhabitants as having an eastern and a western side, the
former joining the vital land- bridge to Asia across the Sinai Peninsula.
The arable lands of valley and delta today present a flat, unvarying landscape of intensively cultivated
fields, crossed by irrigation and drainage canals, and studded with towns and villages half- hidden by groves
of palm trees, and increasingly displaying signs of rapid growth and modernization. Concrete has replaced
mud brick. The transition from fields to desert is still, none the less, abrupt and striking. Civilization visibly
ends along a clear line. On the east the desert plateau above the valley gradually rises to a distant range of
jagged hills and mountains bordering the Red Sea, while on the west it stretches for a distance of more than
4,800 km (3,000 miles) to the Atlantic Ocean, a silent, windswept land of gravel and sand.
The Nile receives two tributaries, the Blue Nile and the Atbara, both rising in the high, mountainous
plateau of Ethiopia. The heavy summer rains in Ethiopia swell enormously the volume of these tributaries,
and sweep down them a heavy load of sediment, rich in minerals. Since the middle of the nineteenth century
ad, by a series of dams, this annual surge has increasingly been held back and controlled. Before that
it was sufficient to flood the Egyptian valley and delta, transforming the country into a long shallow lake,
towns and villages remaining on low islands linked by causeways (Photograph 0.1). As the current was
checked some of the silt settled on to the land and was left behind when the waters receded in October and
November. If crops were then sown in the thick wet mud, the moderate sunshine of autumn and winter
would have ripened them by March or April with little or no need for further watering. Then, after the
harvest in summer, the ground dried and cracked, enabling aeration to take place, which prevented waterlogging
and the excessive accumulation of salt. These three seasons formed the basic divisions of the ancient
Egyptian calendar: Akhet (inundation), Peret (growing), and Shemu (drought).
It was an ideal natural cycle but one that human ingenuity could still do much to improve. Earthen
banks could be raised to enclose large basins where the farmer could allow the waters to remain for a
period before releasing them back into the river. Water could be raised mechanically to irrigate areas above
the normal reach of the flood, or in summer, when the river was at its lowest, to irrigate the fields for a
second crop or to maintain kitchen gardens through the year. Beyond this the waters of the Nile could
be spread further and more efficiently by the creation of a system of irrigation and drainage canals, controlled
by locks, and ultimately, as has been the case since the opening of the High Dam at Aswan in 1970,
by damming back the flood and letting it out gradually so that the river level remains constant and never
overflows its banks. In building up a picture of ancient society it is necessary to consider how far along this
path of improvement the Egyptians went.
The answer appears to be: not very far. The need was not there. The idea of using the fertile land to
grow cash crops to be sold for profit abroad (as developed in the nineteenth century AD) was far from
Figure 0.1 Map of the northern Nile valley marking places mentioned in the text.
Introduction
14
the ancient way of thinking. Population grew only slowly and by the time of the late New Kingdom had
probably not exceeded 3,000,000, a very modest total by today’s standards (official statements currently put
Egypt’s population increase at 1,000,000 every six months). When we examine the ancient sources they
suggest a very elementary picture of land management. The state remained very interested in the annual
yield of the land for the purpose of collecting rents and taxes: this much is clear from written sources. But
the same sources say little or nothing about irrigation. The implication is that this was a local matter outside
government control. It suited everyone concerned to maintain the banks around the basins, and the annual
filling of these by the flood left sufficient moisture in the soil for a single grain crop. There was a professional
interest in the maximum height of each year’s inundation. Records of this were carved on suitable
markers: Nilometers or temple quays. But there is no evidence that the figures were used in calculations
to assess crop yields, although people must have been very well aware of the consequences of flood levels
either much higher or much lower than the average.
Modern irrigation in Egypt involves not only regulating the flow and availability of water from the
Nile via networks of canals, but also the use of machines for lifting it up to ground level. Nowadays the
machines are pumps driven by electricity or by fuel oil. The ancient Egyptians had only the shaduf, a
device of simple construction, a pivoted, horizontal pole with a counterweight at one end and a bucket
or its equivalent suspended at the other (Figure 0.2). It is shown in tomb scenes from the late Eighteenth
Dynasty (c. 1350 BC) onwards, but even then only in scenes of men watering gardens. In earlier versions,
Photograph 0.1 View of the city of Asyut at the height of the inundation, photographed early in the twentieth
century. From L. Borchardt and H. Ricke, Egypt: Architecture, Landscape, Life of the People, London, Orbis Terrarum,
1930, 120.
Figure 0.2 Cultivating perennial gardens and orchards: the improved New Kingdom method, using a shaduf. The top
scene shows a simple shaduf being used to irrigate a garden beside a shrine. The man (his dog behind him) stands on
the bank of a canal and pulls down the vertical pole to dip the suspended bucket into the water. The long pivoting
beam of the shaduf rests on a tall brick pillar, and has a rounded counterweight of mud at its opposite end. The bucket
of a second shaduf is being emptied at the right- hand edge of the picture. Tomb of Ipy (no. 217 at Thebes), c. 1250 BC,
after Davies, Two Ramesside Tombs, Pl. XXIX. In the bottom scene, a more complicated shaduf is shown in operation.
It stands beside a well, at the right- hand edge of the picture, over which projects a platform for the operator. This
man is emptying the bucket into a raised trough (presumably of wood) which passes through the brick shaduf- pillar
and runs down to irrigate an orchard. Tomb of Neferhetep (no. 49 at Thebes), c. 1325 BC, after N. de G. Davies, The
Tomb of Nefer- ḥotep at Thebes, New York, MMA, 1933, Pl. XLVI.
Introduction
16
from before this time, the method was even simpler. We see water brought to gardens in pairs of pottery jars
slung from yokes on the shoulders of men (Figure 0.3). In such scenes we are clearly dealing not with the
irrigation of farmland for the production of a main crop of cereal or flax, but with the watering of only a
limited amount of land out of reach of the flood, and confined to vegetable- and flower- beds and orchards
maintained all the year round. This evidence serves to reinforce the argument that main- crop cereal agriculture
was a matter of a single annual crop dependent upon moisture left in the soil after the inundation.
The importance of appreciating this is not just that it provides the background picture to life in ancient
Egypt. It has sometimes been thought that organized society – civilization – in Egypt and elsewhere
arose from the need for collective effort to control rivers to allow agriculture to develop. In the case of
ancient Egypt one can state that this was not so. The origin of civilization is not to be sought in something
so simple (a consideration of this subject is at the heart of Chapter 2). It is true that modern Egypt is
maintained by an elaborate irrigation system. This is necessary, however, only because of the development
of agriculture as a business, and on account of the massive increase in population that has occurred in the
past two centuries.
Modern Egypt is an Arabic- speaking country, predominantly Islamic in culture, and secular in its civil
law code and most institutions, the product of 1,300 years of Arab rule and influence since the first Arab
invasion of AD 641, modified by the country’s Mediterranean position. Even by the time of the Arab conquest,
however, the ancient Egypt of the Pharaohs lay far in the past. The conquest of Egypt by the Iranian
(Persian) Great King Cambyses (525– 522 BC) brought Egypt into the multicultural Achaemenid empire for
a century during which Aramaic became the language of senior administration. The conquest by Alexander
the Great in 332 BC initiated three centuries of rule by Macedonian kings (the Ptolemies), who managed
to live in Greek style in Alexandria whilst still posing as Pharaohs for the benefit of the more traditionally
minded parts of the country. The last of the line was Queen Cleopatra VII (the Cleopatra) through
whose policies Egypt became, in 30 BC, a province of the Roman empire. We can formally recognize the
end of ancient Egypt in the reign of the Roman emperor Constantine (AD 306– 337). His conversion to
Christianity and his support of the organizational role of the church in society had a profound effect on
Egypt, which became a fervently Christian country. The Christian legacy in modern Egypt is the Coptic
Church. Its language, no longer spoken but preserved in liturgy and in scriptural translations, is the language
of ancient Egypt shorn of hieroglyphic writing (and conveying a very different message).
Figure 0.3 Cultivating perennial gardens: the original method. Water is carried to the square growing- beds in pairs
of pottery jars suspended on wooden yokes. On the right a man kneels planting a lettuce in a hole made with a
stick. Tomb of Mereruka, Saqqara, c. 2300 BC, after P. Duell, The Mastaba of Mereruka I, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1938, Pl. 21
(redrawn by B. Garfi).
Introduction
17
Infusions of outside culture – primarily Hellenistic Greek, Christian and Arab – effectively destroyed
the indigenous Nile valley culture of ancient times, sometimes by a process of gradual modification, sometimes
by deliberate attack. Modern knowledge of ancient Egypt is, therefore, the result of reconstruction
by scholars. It has two main sources: the study of ancient evidence revealed by archaeology, and (before
the decipherment of hieroglyphs in AD 1822) the careful reading of the accounts of classical times, some
of which were made by Greek visitors during the last centuries of Pharaonic rule, and some written from
within the country. In the early days of Egyptology one of the latter provided a ready- made framework of
history and chronology, which is still universally accepted. It is a set of summaries of a now- lost History
of Egypt written in Greek in the third century BC by an Egyptian priest, Manetho. Despite inaccuracies
introduced by copyists, Manetho’s access to temple archives gave his work a degree of detail and authority
which has stood the test of time. In particular, his division of Egyptian history into 30 dynasties, or ruling
families (to which a thirty-first was subsequently added), still provides the basic framework of history. For
convenience, however, modern scholars have grouped Manetho’s dynasties into broader units, as follows
(with modern date estimates and an occasional hiatus or overlap amongst the ruling groups):
Early Dynastic Period (Dyns 1– 2) c. 3085– 2584 BC
(or Archaic Period)
Old Kingdom (Dyns 3– 6) 2584– 2117 BC
First Intermediate Period (Dyns 7/ 8– mid- 11) 2117– 2040 BC
Middle Kingdom (Dyns mid- 11– 13/ 14) 2040– 1650 BC
Second Intermediate Period (Dyns 15– 17) 1650– 1549 BC
(includes the Palestinian ‘Hyksos’ Dynasty in the north of Egypt)
New Kingdom (Dyns 18– 20) 1549– 1069 Bc
Third Intermediate Period (Dyns 21– 24) 1064– 721 BC
Late Period 721– 332 BC
Kushite (Sudanese)/ Assyrian rule (Dyn. 25) 752– 656 BC
Saite Period (Dyn. 26) 664– 525 Bc
First Persian Period (Dyn. 27) 525– 405 BC
Local dynasties (Dyns 28– 30) 404– 342 BC
Second Persian Period (‘Dyn. 31’) 342– 332 BC
Conquest by Alexander the Great 332 BC
Ptolemaic Period 332– 30 BC
Death of Queen Cleopatra VII 30 BC
Roman Period 30 BC–AD 395
Egypt ruled from Byzantium (Constantinople/ Istanbul) AD 395– 641
Arab conquest of Egypt AD 641
Before the First Dynasty came a period of Neolithic/ Chalcolithic culture often called the ‘Predynastic’.
For the Predynastic Period of Upper Egypt more than one set of terms has been developed for the
succession of individual cultural phases. An older scheme ran from the Badarian, through the Amratian to
the Gerzean and then, via a somewhat ambiguous transition, to the First Dynasty. Subsequently Amratian
and Gerzean were generally replaced by the terms Nagada I and Nagada II, which still left the transitional
period undefined. A redivision was proposed some years ago which recognized three Nagada phases: I, II
and III (III overlapping with the First Dynasty), further subdivided by the use of capital letters (e.g. IIC),
and this has become the standard terminology (with the retention of Badarian). They are, however, phases
of culture, defined by styles of pottery and so on. It is clear from a political point of view that, with the
last century or two of the Predynastic Period, we are dealing with ‘kings’, and a useful general term for
them is ‘Dynasty 0’.
Introduction
18
For absolute dates from the end of the Second Dynasty onwards I have used the chronological table
in A. Dodson and D. Hilton, The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt, London, T&H, 2004, 287– 94.
Revised radiocarbon dates for the Predynastic Period and for the kings of the First Dynasty will be found
in M. Dee, D. Wengrow, A.J. Shortland, A. Stevenson, F. Brock, L. Girdland Flink and C. Bronk Ramsey,
Proceedings of the Royal Society A (4 September 2013), http:// rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/ content/ 469/
2159/ 20130395; M.W. Dee, D. Wengrow, A. Shortland, A. Stevenson, F. Brock and C. Bronk Ramsey,
JAS 46 (2014), 319– 23. These dates are a result of statistical modelling of data from fresh samples newly
measured, the samples chosen from transition points between successive predynastic phases, followed by
tight sequences from individual reigns of the First Dynasty. The ‘peaks’ of probability are as follows:
Start of the Badarian 4350 BC
Transition to Nagada I 3750 BC
Transition between Nagada IB and IC 3650 BC
Transition between Nagada IIB and IIC 3450 BC
Transition between Nagada IID and IIIA 3325 BC
Beginning of First Dynasty 3085 BC
Beginning of Second Dynasty 2850/ 75 BC
Notes
1 The words are those of US politician Pat Buchanan, quoted in www.bbc.com/ news/ world- 35152027, dated 26
December 2015.
2 L. Keller and É. Gordon, The Lives of Ants, Oxford, OUP, 2009, 56– 9.
3 I have found Benoît Dubreuil, Human Evolution and the Origins of Hierarchies: the State of Nature, New York, CUP,
2010 to be useful in reflecting on this topic; also the review by Catherine Driscoll, Biology & Philosophy 27 (2012),
125– 35 = http:// link.springer.com/ article/ 10.1007/ s10539- 011- 9266- 2.
4 Bloch, ‘Religion’ places great emphasis on this.
5 N. Humphrey, Soul Dust: the Magic of Consciousness, London, Quercus, 2011, p. 71.
6 O.E. Lowenstein, ‘The Pre- Socratics, Lucretius, and modern science.’ In D.R. Dudley, ed., Lucretius, London,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965, 1– 17, p. 3.
7 As a definition (the wording is mine) I prefer it to one cited by Russell Powell and Steve Clarke, ‘Religion as an
evolutionary byproduct: a critique of the Standard Model.’ British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 63 (2012),
457– 86, p. 458, n. 1: ‘Cognitive scientists of religion often refer to “minimally counterintuitive agents” to describe
postulated beings that would be described more casually as “supernatural”’ (p. 458, n. 1). I thank Hans Barnard for
this reference. ‘Metapersons’ is another suggestion.
8 Brent Nongbri, Before Religion: a History of a Modern Concept, New Haven, CT, and London, YUP, 2015 treats this
theme in some detail. T. Insoll, ed., Archaeology and World Religion, London and New York, Routledge, 2001 is one
study that takes it for granted that the subject is viable, though admitting (pp. 3– 10) the near- impossibility of
finding a common theoretical framework.
9 The subject continues to attract scholarly interest, e.g. J.K. Hoffmeier, Akhenaten, His Religion and the Origins of
Monotheism, Oxford and New York, OUP, 2014; J. Assmann, From Akhenaten to Moses: Ancient Egypt and Religious
Change, Cairo, AUC Press, 2014; B. Pongratz- Leisten, ed., Reconsidering the Concept of Revolutionary Monotheism,
Winona Lake, IN, Eisenbrauns, 2011.
10 Richard Jenkyns, ‘Introduction’, in Lucretius: the Nature of Things, translated and with notes by A.E. Stallings; introduction
by Richard Jenkyns. Penguin Classics. Penguin Books, London, 2007, vii– xxiv, p. xii; see also S. Gillespie
and P. Hardie, eds, The Cambridge Companion to Lucretius, Cambridge, CUP, 2007.
11 In The Swerve: How the Renaissance Began, New York, Norton, 2011; London, Vintage, 2012, S. Greenblatt narrates
how a Papal secretary, Poggio Bracciolini, discovered a manuscript copy in a monastery probably in central
Germany in 1417, copied it and began the process by which it eventually became part of the mainstream of modern
knowledge.
12 A city in Middle Egypt (called by the Greeks Hermopolis) took its name from this Eight configuration, the name
for which was Khemnu, which survives in the name of the modern village on the site, El- Ashmunein. The sources
are very brief, without significant narrative: Faulkner, Coffin Texts I, 77– 87, Spells 76, 79 and 80; Allen, Genesis in
Introduction
19
Egypt, 18– 21; F. Dunand and C. Zivie- Coche, Gods and Men in Egypt: 3000 bce to 395 ce, Ithaca, NY, and London,
CoUP, 2004, 49– 50; R.T. Rundle Clarke, Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt, London, T&H, 1959, 54– 5.
13 I owe this last phrasing and idea to Corinne Duhig.
14 Bloch, ‘Religion’, 196, who also comments (p. 188) ‘anthropologists have, after countless fruitless attempts, found it
impossible to usefully and convincingly cross- culturally isolate or define a distinct phenomenon that can analytically
be labelled “religion” ’; also M. Bloch, ‘Is there religion at Çatalhöyük ... or are there just houses?’ In I. Hodder,
ed., Religion in the Emergence of Civilization: Çatalhöyük as a Case Study, Cambridge, CUP, 2010, 146– 62. I also wrote
Kemp, All that Matters with the same convention in mind.
15 C. Humphrey and J. Laidlaw, The Archetypal Actions of Ritual: a Theory of Ritual Illustrated by the Jain Rite of Worship,
Oxford, OUP, 1994, reprinted in 2004, 66, quoting J. Skorupski, 1976. Symbol and Theory: a Philosophical Study of
Theories of Religion in Social Anthropology, Cambridge, CUP, 1976, 131. ‘Ritual’, when used to describe the behaviour
of people living a traditional way of life, is often attached to the word ‘dancing’. But is there such a thing as nonritual
dancing?
16 See http:// blogs.loc.gov/ loc/ 2013/ 01/ update- on- the- twitter- archive- at- the- library- of- congress/ , http:// firstmonday.
org/ ojs/ index.php/ fm/ article/ view/ 5619/ 4653 and www.politico.com/ story/ 2015/ 07/ library- of- congress-twitterarchive-
119698.html.
17 Parkinson, Poetry and Culture, Ch. 9.
18 Even ant colonies are not quite what they seem. Research reveals that social insects, bees and ants alike, are latently
anarchic but are for the most part held in check by policing strategies which are genetically controlled: L. Spinney,
‘Anarchy in the hive!’ New Scientist 15 January 2005, 42– 5; http:// bio.kuleuven.be/ ento/ pdfs/ spinneynewsci2005_
anarchyinthehive.pdf?id=mg18524821.900, articles prompted by Keller and Gordon, The Lives of Ants. Ch. 25,
‘Caste Struggles’, briefly covers the topic of ‘police workers’.
19 The idea that optimistic outcomes underlie human behavior as part of the natural order and possibly show up in
Egyptian calendars of lucky and unlucky days is explored in B.J. Kemp and P.J. Rose, CAJ 1 (1991), 103– 29.
20 Moeller, Urbanism, 219– 46.

