
Pharaoh Ramesses II
and His Times


KENNETH A. KITCHEN






RA..'\.iES:S:ES: (R ...MsEs) II inherited a challenge a.ad a vision when he came to power around 1279 BCE. Two hundred years before, the Eighteenth Dynasty kings Thutmose (Tuthmosis) I and III had carried Egypt to the dizziest heights of her political power. They had "extended the boundaries of Egypt" as far as the great west¡ ern bend of the Euphrates River. Even under pressure from rival powers like Mitanni, Egypt had still ruled up the coast to Ugarit (modern Ras Shamra), and to Qadesh (Tell Nebi lend) in inland Syria. Far south, up the Nile River, Egypt's boundary had been set beyond the Fourth C::it::iract, extending the rule of the phar¡ aohs for some two thousand miles (3,200 kilo¡ meters) from the Mediterranean coasts to the northern Sudan. Just a centmy before Rarnes¡ ses's time, Eighteenth Dynasty magnificence reached its peak under Amenhotep (Ameno¡ phis) III, expressed most tangibly in the con- 5Lluct1on of temples of previously unequaled size and splendor. The duty of any pharaoh was to equal, if not surpass, the achievements of his "royal ancestors" in the 5crvice uf Lht guc.h and so to the benefit of Egypt. So the Eighteenth Dynasty set a high standard to emulate.
  But that same dynasty had bequeathed a neg¡ ative challenge also. Amenhotep Ill's son-as Akhenaten-had plunged Egypt into tunnoil. During his absorption in the attempt to substi¡ tute exclusive worship of the sun disk Aten

(Aton) for that of Egypfs large family of gods, foreign affairs had taken a back seat. Conflict between the Hittites and htanni spilled over into Egypt's sphere in Syria, losing her the con¡ trol of Ugarit, Qadesh, and much else. The
losses were not recovered by Akhenaten's suc¡ cessors, leaving the military fa<'tion in Egypt as dissatisfied as the dispossessed  priests had
been under Akhenaten (see the preceding arti¡ cle in this section).
The New Men
Last ruler of the Eighteenth Dynasty, Horem¡ hcb had l.Huughl back internal order and pros¡ perity to Egypt. But, for the third time, in suc¡ cession, Egypt had a pharaoh with no son to
>1,.,11re the succession. To solve that problcrn, Horemheb turned to a long-standing military colleague of his, one Pramesse, appointing him first as senior vizier, then as official heir to the kingdom. Pramesse hailed from the east Delta and came of a traditionally military family. He had a son, Sety (Seti, Sethos), who (even before HoremhebÀs death) had children of his own, in¡ cluding a baby boy who was destined to be¡ come the Ramesses II of history. So, when Pramesse did succeed Horemheb (as Ramesses I), the new dynasty-the ineteenth-had a ready-made succession of its own, to assure the future of F.izypt',; l,ingship.
The new king himself died in his second














year, gi\ing way to his son Sety I. The policies that the father had no opportunity to enact were vigorously executed by the son. In three or four campaigns, Sety I crushed all opposition in Egyptian-held Canaan, reaffirmed his rule over the Phoenician ports, and briefly wrested south-Syrian Qadesh from the Hittites, leaving there a \ictory stela as his "visiting card." But this triumph was transient, and Qadesh soon returned to Hittite rule, prob:tbly by :i trP.11.ty that recognized Egypt's dominance in Phoeni¡ cia. Neither side saw advantage in prolonging conflict.
More permanent were Sety's works of peace.
Here, he planned to honor the greatest gods of Egypt on a scale even surpassing the Eigh¡ teenth Dynasty. King of the gods, patron of em¡ pire, was Amun of Thebes-it was the over¡ weening theological claims of this deity that liatl led :\khcnatcn to banish him in favor of Aten. But Sety I followed the subtler policy of giving _-\mun the greatest buildings, but honor¡ ing him as merely the first of three chief gods. The other hvo were Re, traditional sun-god at Heliopolis (biblical On), and Ptah, the venera¡ ble creator-god at Memphis (modem Mit Rah¡ ina). Alongside these three, Osiris at Abydos (modern Araba al-Madfuna) embodied the Egyptians' hopes for life after death. So Sety built magnificently for all four deities. For Amun in Thebes, he turned the new front court at Karnak's temple into the greatest columned hall CYcr seen then or since-the "Gre:;it Hypostyle Hall" of modern guidebooks. Di¡ rectly opposite, on the desert's edge west of the NilP., hP huilt his own large memorial temple
for himself and his father, as local forms of
A.mun, for their afterlife. In the desert Valley of the Kings, Sety ordered to be dug the vastest underground tomb that had existed up to that time. In the north at the traditional capital, Memphis, Sety planned another great hall for the temple uf Ptali. Acw55 the Nile at Heliopo¡ lis, he undertook a great pylon gateway, fronted by obelisks (one of which is now in Rome), sta¡ tues, and an avenue of sphinxes. At Abydos he erected his noblest temple, in honor of Osiris, Aman-Re, Ptah, and himself, in creamy lime¡ stone, exquisitely carved and painted, plus a "tomb" of Osiris.
In all of these activities, the young prince

Ramesses was involved with his father, as a royal apprenticeship-taken on campaigns, sent out with quarrying expeditions, and so on. Eventually, Sety uedareJ. Ilamc.s.sc.s prince re¡ gent, giving him almost all of the trappings of kingship. He went on his own first little "war" in Nubia, ordered the building of his first tem¡ ple, also in Nubia at Bayt al-Wali, became titu¡ lar army chief, and so on. Then, at the height of his powers, Sety I died in the twelfth or four¡ teenth year of his reign (opinions are divided on which year). Thus, in his twenties, young
Ramesses II inherited a vast empire and all his father's untinished proJects as legacy.


FROM CONFLICT TO CONCORD
A Model Pharaoh (Years 1-4)
Thenewking had chosen his traditional five¡ fold titles to express his ideals and ambitions with unusual clarity. As a goddess, :\fa'at per¡ sonified truth, justice, right order in life. So, as Falcon King (Horus) and Strong Bull, Ramesses took the epithet "Beloved of Maat," patron of Egypt's highest value:..ò p1otegc of the ancient goddesses of Upper and Lower Egypt (nebty), he declared himself "Protector of Egypt, Vanquisher of Foreign Lands." As Colden Falcon, his hope was to be "Rich in Years, Great in Victories." His twin cartouches (royal rin s) enclosed the throne name Us¡ ermare Setepenre, "Sun [Re] Strong in Ma'at, Chosen of the Sun-god," and his personal name Ramesses, "Beloved of Amun."
  The young king's first duty was to bury his father, Sety I, in the latter's sumptuous tunnel¡ tomb, hidden away deep in the \ -alley of the Kings in the Je:.erl l1ilb on the ,...-c.st banlc ut Thebes. "Who buries inherits" was the Egyp¡ tian rule, on the mythological model of Horus burying his father, Osiris: H>1mP.ssps stayed on to celebrate Amun's great feast of Opet and (as was customary then) to make new administra¡ tive appointments and promotions. Thus, by Amun's oracle, a new high priest of Amun was appointed. Harnesses would also have chosen (in committee) the site for his own tomb in the royal valley; certainly, his own \Àa.st memorial temple (the Ramesseum) was already begun in














western Thebes. Sailing back north, Ramesses called in at Abydos and found it necessary to give fresh impetus to the work of completing his father's magnificent temple, no doubt alongside work on his own nearby. Then, it was back to Memphis and to his project for a new east-Delta capital at his hometown, now to be called Pi-Ramsese, "Domain of Ramesses" (near the modern site of Tell al-Dab'a at Qantir).
Such projects needed wealth. So in year 3,
the young king sought eagerly to increase ex¡ ploitation of the gold minesÀ in Nubia. In Akuyati (Wadi al-'Allaqi area) were rich de¡ posits, but acute water-supply problems hin¡ dered work there. His plans bore fruit; water was found, and so the gold could be mined. Equal rnccess attemled his first campaign in Syria. Signaling his passage by a stela near the Dog River (Nahr al-Kalb) in the Lebanon in year -4, Ramesses overwhelmed the kingdom of Amurru, compelling it to forsake Hittite alle¡ giance and return to Egyptian rule.




Fig. I. Statue of a youthful Ramesses II. EGYPTU .Y.
,\fUSEL-:ll OF TURIN (1990)

Battles Royal (Years 5-18)
Encouraged by his initial success, Ramesses aimed at the recapture of Qadesh, which would open the way to northern Syria as in the great days of Thutmose III. But the aggrieved Hittite ruler Muwattalli (Muwatallis) II planned other¡ wise. He mustered the biggest army he could, lay in wait just east of Qadesh, and sent out two spies who were to allow themselves to be cap¡ tnred and mi!.infonn Ramesse.s th::it Mnwattalli was far distant (See "Military Organization in Egypt" in Part 4, this volume.)
  Ramesses swallowed their tale and pushed on recklessly to encamp west of Qadesh. The trap was sprung, as the Hittite chariotry then swung across the Orantes River fords to cut through one Egyptian division and swoop upon Ramesses's camp and first division to finish off the job. But three factors ruined the Hittite muster plan. First, another hvo Hittite spies were apprehended at the last moment, and the
true situation was wrung from their lips. Sec¡ ond, thus warned, the young pharaoh displayed great aplomb and fierce bravery in scraping to¡ gether a group of warriors and ferociously charging back at the Hittite attackers, catching them off guard. Third, at this vital moment, an Egyptian auxiliary force arrived to rendezvous with the pharaoh, enabling him to push the Hittites decisively back into the river in confu¡ sion. So the day was saved. The next day Harn¡ esses counterattacked but could not rout the stolid Hittite troop . Stalemate resulted; action ceased. Such was the famous battle of Qadesh. (See the box on the battle of Qadesh in "Hittite Military Organization" in Part 4.)
The political results were less clear-cut.
Ramesses's personal bravery saved him and his forces from total annihilation but led only to stalemate, and he never took Qadesh. Once he returned to Egypt, the Hittites e,-en took over the Egyptian province of Upi temporarily. But neither did the Hittites win outright, they lost the flower of their chariotry with several top leaders. And meanwhile, Assyria marched into the Hittite protectorate of Khanigalbat (the one¡ time Mitanni).
  For a year or so, Ramesses avoided great ad¡ ventures, refurbishing his forces and perhaps then subduing emergent Moab and Edom
















Fig. 2. Scene from a relief excavated at Luxor of the Battle of Qadesh, 1275 BCE. CIL-\RLES
KU TI, LA BATAILLE DE QAfJESH (1928-1934)



across the Jordan. In year 8 he subjugated Gali¡ lee and probably regained Upi and Damascus. Year 10 found him passing Dog River ant.I BeiÀ rut. At that time and later, he tried a new tactic. Instead of attacking Qadesh directly, he out¡ flanked it on the north, entering central Syria from the coast to strike at Tunip and Dapur. But these cities simply returned to the Hittite fold once he went home. So, tiring of indeci¡ sive results, Ramesses ceased his campaigns.
  High-level politics took over. The new young Hittite king l"rkhi-Teshub (also called Mur¡ shili/ Mursilis 111) was ousted by his am¡ bitious uncle Khattushili (Hattusili) III and exiled to nor.Ji Syria. The young man fled to Egy11L.  Fewillg  Ll1al  na1m;55c;5  might back Urkhi-Teshub's claims, Khattushili demanded his extradition, which the pharaoh refosed. War loomed A ,teb of ye::ir ,R ::it RPth-ShP'::in in northern Canaan may reflect Ramesses II's as¡ suming a defensive position there at that time. Suddenly, however, the crisis went flat. Khani¡ galbat had eYentually returned to Hittite rule after Qadesh. but now the new Assyrian king, Shalmaneser I, reoccupied Khanigalbat and or¡ ganized it as totally Assyrian territory, not simply as a ,- sal. Khattushili III found him¡ self in danzer of war on two fronts, so he coaacd  to ''OIT)'  about  Egypt  and  Url<hi Teshub.


The Road to Peace (Years 1. 21)
After a decent pause, therefore, Khattushili III found it prudent to come to terms with Egypt. Negotiations finally led to a full treaty of peace and alliance in year 21 of Ramesses II, ending all hostilities. Ramesses recognized Khattushili as legitimate ruler and gaye up all claim to Qadesh; Egyptian interests in Phoenicia were safeguarded. Amid celebrations, messages of congratulation were exchanged by the respec¡ tive queens and others, accompanied by lavish oresents. The splendid silver treaty-tablet given to Ramesses by Khattushili is long since gone, but cuneiform copies on clay tablets from the Hittite archives and an Egyptian translation on two hieroglyphic stelae in Thebes preserve its contents for us.


THE SUN KING
A Land uf Temples
Wars abroad occupied only a few months in the year. Meanwhile, Ramesses II' s first nventy years saw his building program go steadily for¡ ward. Pi-Ramsese in the east Delta took clear shape: a great palace, glittering with multico¡ lorod fnionco tileworl<; Rne temples of Amun, Re, and Ptah, plus the local god Seth; army bar-




At War: Ramesses II in the Thick of the Battle of Qadesh ("Poem," Excerpts)


Then his majesty set off at a gallop;
he plunged amid the forces of the Hittite foe, being entirely on his own, no other with him.
So his majesty went on to look around him; he found twenty-five hundred chariots hP-mminiz him in. all around,
-all theHittite foe's swiftest force, ..
  -three men to a chariot, acting as one unit. [The king speaks:] "But there was no high
ofllc.; 1 w il.11 1uc,
no charioteer,
no army soldier,¡ no shield bearer.
But my army and my chariotry melted away
before them;
none could sta d up to them, to fight with
them."
Then said his majesty:
"What's up with you, now, my father Amun? Has it been a father's part ever to ignore his son?
And have I done anything without you? Do I not go and stop at your word?
-T  h::ivP rlisnhPyPrl nn pl:m th::it yon
commanded!
How much greater is he, mighty Lord of Egypt, than to allow mere foreigners to approach hb path.
What are these Asiatics to you, 0 Amun?
-despicable creatures, ignorant of God!
Have I not made for you a crowd of monuments?
I filled your temples with my captures.


"I built great pylons for you,
myself setting up their great flagstaffs.
l brought you obelisks from Elephantine,
myself acting as stone carrier.
I directed for you ships at sea,

ferrying for you the tribute of foreign lands.
What will people say, if even the least evil befalls him,
who depended on your counsel?
-Do good to him who counts on you,
  -then people will serve you willingly indeed.
I have called on you, 0 Amun,
\vhile I am among multitudes whom I
know not.
All the foreign lands have united against me, I being left utterly alone, none others with me.

"See, even though I made petition from the back
of beyond,
my voice echoed in distant Thebes.
I found that Amun came, just as I called him; he gave me his hand, so I rejoiced.
He spoke out from behind me, as close as face to face:
'Forward! I am with you, I am your Father,
my hand is on vou!'

"So I shot on my right and captured on my left, . . .
I found that the twenty-five hundred chariots, in whose midst I was,
fell prostrate before my horses; none could
fight."


[The Hittites shout]: "He's no mere man, "Àho's
among us!
-It's Seth great-in-power, Baal in
person!
1\ot the acts of a mere man, the things he does; they belong to one who is utterly
unique!"




racks, stores, and workshops; homes and offices of princes and high officials; and the town proper. A basin and link with the eastern branch of the Nile made it a port for Mediterra¡ nean trat▒ic into Egypt. Far to the south the

great temples of Abydos and at Thebes came near completion. In the Ramesseum stood a thousand-ton colossus that inspired Percy Bysshe Shelley's poem on Ozymandias more than three thousand years later. In several tern-












History and Culturn


At Peace: Ramesses II tarries a Hittite Princess (Lesser and Great Stelae of First Hittite Marriage)


Now, his majesty was ruler of nations. great lord of all lands;
heaven shook.. earth trembled, when he
took up He's kingship.
Re has said to hio. every tjme he rises,
-"What's o your mind?-I'II do it for
yo11I"
So the king's wares on earth, they \\Àere heard in hea\Àen.


Rebellious forei;:-,ers come in peace, their chiefs =der hissandals,
such that even tl-.e Hittites, opponents of Egypt,
have come u::'.der his control, ...	just like Egypt.
The great Hitti:t- ruler sent to paeif:.Àhis majesty,
year after-c.u,-Lul lu:: Áaiu IIU heed.
Then he brou::" out his eldest daughter, with rich gifts,
-gold, siJ,.-E:r. copper in abundance,
-slaves;,:,:;..'ls of horses, limitless, for Rames;e::; IL
His majesty was infom1ed, thus:
"SeeÀ, the great Hittite n.ilcr has sent hi, cldc t
daughter, ...
they smot.l:,e, the roads, ...	all the Hittite grandees.
They have cro,;cd remote mountains, difficult passes,
    they have r-::;:c:hed your majesty's frontier. Let thP army ,.-. ,1lficials go wek-ome them,0
King!"


Then his maJes - pondered m his mind, saying, "How will they ::::anage, . . . in Syria,
in these da:.-; ,Jf rain and snow. happening in
winter?"
So he offered ric::.Iy to his father Seth, petitioning :::im:
"The sky is in y:,;r care, and the earth under
;Àour feet
   -what hai:;:-cns is what you command. So may you not ;end rain, icy blast, or snow,
until the mc.:-,el you have commanded reaches me.-
His father Seth :.E:eded all that he had said. And so, the sky w,,_; calm, summer days in

winter, so that his army and officials could set out.


They formed an escort, mingling with the Hittite troops,
..  _. they ale: aml urnuk together as one, like
brothers.
None spumed his fellow, having peace and friendship.
Then the rulers of the lands the cavalcade
passed by,
   -they cringed, turning away, fainting, when they saw Hittites joining with the anny of
    the king: [They exclaim]:
"As for the Hittite land, it's with Ramesses just like Egypt,
such that even the s_ky is under his thumb,
and whatever he wishes, it does!"
As the cavalcade arrived in Pi-Ramsese,
the king made great celebration, in year
34. À À À
Ihtviug, arrived, from travehng to Egypt,
the daughter of the great Hittite ruler was presented to his majesty,
with great and rich tribute, limitless in all respects.
Then his majesty beheld her, fair of features, first of women,
-and thegrandc:c: liuuured her as a very
goddess!
Indeed, it was a great and mysterious e\Àent, a precious wonder,
-unknown and unheard of in popular tradition,
-unparalleled in the writings of the
nce tors ....
Shwebaeaustiful in the opinion of his majesty, he loved her to distraction, as a momentous occasion for him,
a tnumph that his father Ptah-Tatonen had
decreed for him.
Her Egyptian name was proclaimed as
"The royal wife, l'vfaat-Hor-Neferu-Re, may she live!
Daughter of the great Hittite ruler, Daughter of the great Hittite queen."






I



Phnrnnh Rnmp_i;ses TT and	His	Times



Shewas installed in the palace, in the king's domain,
accompanying the sovereign daily,
her name being proclaimed in the entire land.


The troops, ... court officials, ...	and citizens, they drank together, in joy, for King Ramesses II.


Then the Hittite land was single-mindedly under his majesty,
e\Àen King Usermare Setepenre, Son of Re, Harnesses II.
.-\fterward, if man or woman went on business to
S Tia,
they could even reach the Hittite land without fear of evil,
because of the magnitude of his majesty's
,ictories!





pies, brilliantly curved and colored rclicfo bla¡ zoned forth Ramesses's heroism at Qadesh and in later wars. Far upriver, in Nubia, the twin temples at Abu Simbel for Ramesses II and his beautiful chief queen, Nefertari, were hewn from the living rock and dedicated by about year 23. Building work of all kinds proceeded throughout Egypt and Nubia during most of the reign. Outside of the capital cities, the repair of older temples and construction of new ones extended, for example, to Herrno¡ polis  (modern  al-Ashmunein),  Araba  al¡
\ladfuna (Abydos), Armant, and Edfu. There
\\'PTP ::ilsn rny::1! f"'11lt centers in Nubia at Serf
Hussein's Wadi al-Sebu'a, al-Derr, Aksha (Serra
\Vest), 'Amara West, and distant Napata.

The Royal Family, Near and Far
Ramesses was no solitary. Initially he had two chief queens, Nefertari and Istnofret (or Isi¡ nofre) who-along with the women of the harem-presented him with a long series of sons and daughters. Diplomatic marriages brought Babylonian and other princesses to that harem (often not to be seen again, dip¡ lomatic gossip used to say), culminating in R:imesses's marriage to Khattushili IIl'5 cldc5t daughter in year 34 and to a second daughter perhaps a decade later, amid great festivities eac:h time. But various hitchPs harl nPbyPcl thP first such marriage, such that at one point Ram¡ esses II had scandalized the Hittite queen by suggesting that the Hittites should at any rate send the dowry even if they couldn't manage a princess. Of the pharaoh's offspring, most fa¡ mous (right down to Roman times) was his


fourth 30n, Prince Khacn,-wa.3ct, who Lc<..:ct111c ct
learned scholar, even (like Egyptologists) in¡
\Àestigating the ancient pyramids. Khaemwaset identified the original owners of these pyra¡ mids, setting out the fact in new inscriptions on these structures. These inscriptions were like enormous museum labels. He designed new burial \Àaults for the sacred Apis bulls of Ptah in the :\lemphite necropolis at Saqqara.

Jubilees arid the Royal Cult
.-\fter thirty years' reign a pharaoh could enact the Sed festival for renewal of his kingship and reI-Jeal it at three- or four-year intervals. So, probably for the first time in about seventy-five years, Ramesses II celebrated such a jubilee in his year 30 and then the longest-ever series of thirteen or fourteen such jubilees during the rest of his reign. A great jubilee hall was rap¡ idh- erected in Pi-Ramsese (reusing old hnilcl¡ ings), and likewise the splendid west hall at the temple of Ptah in Memphis, for these ancient ceremonials.
tlut throughout his reign, Ramesses II sought
more widely to focus his people's loyalty on the monarchy by encouraging popular cults dei¡
--ing hinuclf in va,iou a _Áccb uf kingshtp. In
humble chapels constructed by ordinary peo¡ ple, the named colossal statues of the king be¡ fnrP tPmplP'- in Pi-Ramsese, Abu Simbel, and elsewhere served as symbols for these cults: Ramesses as "Ruler of Rulers," "Sun of Rul¡ ers," "Beloved of Atum," "the God," and so on. His temple at Aksha in Lower Nubia honored Ramesses II as "Lord of Nubia." Here he de¡
\ eloped on a grand scale a concept already pio-
















Fig. :l. ThP Ahn SimhPl TP.mplP. constructed circa 1270 BCE. contains four colossal statues of Harnesses II with smaller statues of his relatives positioned at the ruler's legs. The rock temple was opened in 1817 CE, but in the 1960s it was moved to higher ground to avoid flooding from the Aswan High Dam. COLr\TESY OF JOHN RUFFLE




neere<l l,y Ame11.l1uteIJ Ill au<l Tula11klia.iuu11. Forms of the major goos themselves \.,.Àere linked with the king-Amun of Ramesses, Ptah of Ramesses-as were goddesses, such as 'Anath of Ramesses.

Tho Sunset Years
Decade by decade, Ramesses seemed to reign interminably, outliving tliree successive heirs apparent:  Amenhirkhop,hef,  Ramesses, ::incl the famed sage Khaemwaset. In Ramesses's latest years, his thirteenth son and fourth heir, Memeptah, became the old king's right-hand man, after a military career. Finally, early in his sixty-seventh year of reign, the old king passed away, leaving Memeptah (already elderly, at least sixty-plus) the new pharaoh of J:'..gypt.

LIFE IN RAMESSES Il'S EGYPT

The Hierarchy
No pharaoh ruled t;gypt single-handedly. By this time, two men commonly held the concur¡ rent posts of southern (senior) and northern vi¡ zier, aJ chief cxccutivc(3) under the king. ,vith responsibility in Thebes, the southern vizier had direct charge of the royal tomb in the Val¡ l1w of the Kings ancl of the .qiecial work force and community maintained to hew out and decorate the great royal tombs. Highly efficient was Paser, under both Sety I and Ramesses II. Sometimes the dual office was held by one man, as by Khay, Paser's successor. Close to the vizier stood the chief of the treasury (con¡ cerned wlrh revenues), rhe supertmendem of




77░




granaries of north and south, and the higb stew¡
ards of temple and royal estates.
  The vast southern province of Nubia came under thP. "lring's son of Kush," or viceroy of Xubia, aided by his two deputies in Upper and Lower Nubia. Forces under the troop com¡ mander of Kush maintained Egyptian authority, crushing periodic rebellions by Nubians tired of Egyptian taxation. The viceroy Setau used this force to press-gang people from the south¡ ern oases intu slave labor to build the later Nu¡ bian temples of Ramesses II as, for example, at Wadi el-Sebu'a in the forties of the king's
reign.
  Back in Egypt, the major temples had their committees of chief priest and senior priests, plus the learned lectors, who knew the rituals, and the ordinary "lay priests," who served one month thrice per year on rotas. High stewards cared for the vast properties of the greatest temples.
  The Egypt of Ramesses II appears to have been relatively prosperous at most levels of so¡ ciety, to judge from the sheer quantity (and so¡ cial spread) of material remains from the reign.
.\lany stelae and small items belonged to peo¡ ple of rP.lativP.ly modest station. In western Thebes, large numbers of painted tomb¡ chapels date to this reign, ranging socially from a vizier like Paser down to middle-rank priests and officials (to say nothing of the special work¡ men for the royal tombs). At Saqqara, the vast city cemeteries of Memphis possess a long se¡ ries of tomb chapels hkewise from the epoch ot Ramesses II.

Religion
Egypt's vast temples were never places of con¡ gregational worship. but more like powP.r¡ houses on a spiritual plane. Offerings to the gods were intended to gain their corresponding blessings upon Egypt and its people. Beyond the open courts and columned halls, deep within the sanctuary area, a body of priests faithfully carried out the appropriate rites be¡ fore the image of the deity morning, noon, and evening. Such rites centered on the presen¡ tation of well-prepared food offerings, ac¡ comoaniP.il hy invoc.:ttions rich in mythologicnl

allusions. After presentation to the deities of the temples, the offerings went by "reversion" to the spirit of the reigning king and all of his predece;;;;ors, and then Lefore sta.tuc3 of privi¡ leged notables, before the offerings passed
back to the officiating priests for consumption.
On the great festivals, proportionally richer fare benefited a wider circle of celebrants. Veiled within the cabin of a gilded model bark, borne upon the shoulders of the priests, the god's por¡ table nnage would go in procession and might travel to another temple, then sometimes on a great gilded barge upon the Nile. So Amun did, from Karnak to and from LUA.UL (Al-Ay_:su.r), a.s when Ramesses II was there in his first year. Only on such magnificent occasions did the populace see much of their nation's great gods. Theological thinking among the learned began by this time to speculate that all deity might be summed up in Amun, Re, and Ptah, and they in tum might be but aspects of one great god. But this concept remained the property of literati and the priests rather than of ordinary folk.
  The religion of the ordinary people centered in modest chapels (as at Dayr al-Madina, village of the west-Theban royal workmen). As papyri of Ramesses H's time indicate, the same basic rites were enacted here before the gods as in the great temples, but much more modestly. Alongside the great gods, local gods, and royal cults, we find the deities of hearth and home, like the montrous dwarf Bes and Taweret, a goddess of childbirth.
The .tgyptians had long believed in a life
after death, for which they developed their elaborate construction of tombs with chapels for ongoing pc1so11al cull, I.ht: rites ofmummlfl¡ cation, and the provision of funerary fur¡ nishings for the next life. Those who passed the "last jnrlvnPnt" before 01,irii: (and who did not?) might live in an ideal Egypt beyond. Their souls might ascend from the burial cham¡ ber to greet the sunrise in this world's Ei:rvot. and return home to the body at eventide. Even if no more offerings came, the rich scenes on tomb-chapel walls could magically secure their otherworldly needs. Then, as in any commu¡ nity, skeptics were to be found; in some tombs, two very different "Songs of the Harpist," one praining the happy 3t<1tc to come:, um:: :,aylug




771







"but none return to tell us" of it, might be carved on facing walls.

The Arts
In the service of temple and tomb, wall paint¡ ings and painted reliefs, as well as stah.iary, had long since attained peaks of excellence. The reign of Sety I and the early years of Ramesses
II saw the end of one such peak, exemplified bv the Turin statrn of RamP,'"" TT, the splen¡ did painted reliefs of Sety I at Abydos, some work in both of their tombs in the Valley of the Kings, and some very fine painting in the tombs of otHcials in western Thebes. But the com¡ placent prosperity of the age produced few masterworks. The decorative arts often crafted delightful pieces: ointment spoons and pots and the like.
In literature, the schools still brought up
budding scribes on ancient "classic!." such as
The Story of Sinuhe and the Satire on the Trades-both more than five hundred years old by Ramesses's day. But new works were now being added to the curriculum, in the language of the day, constituting a modest "educational reform." They included the satirical letter in Papyrus Anastasi 1, in which one scribe teases another over his inability to deal with erecting colossi, to feed an army on campaign, or to cope with Syro-Palestinian geography. New works of instructional wisdom, such as those by Any and Amenemope (forerunners of biblical Proverbs), appP.arP.cl. l\'P.w folkbles were written down in the popular language: the tale of the doomed prince, decreed to die by dog, snake, or croco¡ dile; ghost stories; and an allegory of truth and falsehood, among a variety of pieces.
  But most attractive to the modem reader are probably the lyric love-poems of the age, !? which boy and girl ("brother.. and ..sister )
long for each other. In one, the young lady in¡ vites her boyfriend:

My wish is to enter the water pool), to bathe myself before you,
so may I allow you to see my beauty,
in finest linen, soaked in fragrant oils,
[in a pool edged] with reed_,.
I'll go down into the water \\ith you,
I'll emorgc, a red carp gliatcnin; in m)À finger,,
[I'll invite] my brother, "Come, see me'"

THE SUCCESSION: LIFE AFTER RAMESSES II

Merneptah the Determined
How does one follow a career like that of Ram¡ esses II (especially in one's sixties)? Despite his age, i\Iemeptah lacked neither energy nor determination. He chose radically different ep¡ ithets for his five-part titulary, to express much the same ideals. He soon made it clear to the wider world that he had every intention of maintaining his father's empire in full. So, early in hi 1t::ig11, lie <lbl,)alche<l hb army to Canaan to quell a11 trace of revolt, putting down dissidents at Gezer (modern Tell Jezar) and AshqP.lon (or Ascalon) in the southwest and at Yanoam (modern al-'Abaydiya) in the north. Probably up in the hills, his troops briefly col¡ lided with a new entity: Israel-in its only oc¡ currence so far recovered in Egyptian records.
  This mention, on Merneptah'-s later victory stela of his year 5, is of considerable historical importance. The context and spelling of the name make it clear that a distinctive tribal (not territorial) entity named Israel was already present in Cana.an by Mcrncptah'.3 fifth year at thelatest. In biblical tradition uniformly (con¡ trary to some ill-founded modern hypotheses), the Hebrew clans had escaped from Egypt to Sinai (there becoming a community by cove¡ nant with their deity). Then, via Transjordan, they had penetrated into Canaan. Traditionally, this passage horn Nile to Jordan took a full gen¡ eration, forty years (compare the specific thirty¡ eight years of Deuteronomy 2: 14). If one al¡ lowc:<l uv lu lialf a century for this sequence, then the Exodus from Egypt would have fallen under Ramesses II no less, and conceivably within his years 15 to <15 as broad limits. \Tosti gial Egyptian features of the Late Bronze Age within the Exodus narratives would agree with this possibility: mentions of the	town (Pi) Ramsese (see Genesis 47:11, Exodus 12:37, and Numbers 33:3,5), which fell into desuehlde within 140 years; the precise nature of the Nile plagues; the technology of the "tabernacle" shrine; the rectangular encampment around it; the silver trumpets; and so on.
In year ::;, however, ?\.lc1111::ptc:1l1 l1c:1<l Lu fe11<l
off a double threat from Libya westward and



772




Nubia southward. A six-hour battle broke the Libvan tide, while his viceroy quelled the Nu¡ bia revolt. Thus, Egypt had security for an¡ other geueration and hferneptah' 5 ten-year reign ended worthy of his great predecessor.

The End of Ramesses II' s Dynasty
But who succeeded the doughty Merneptah, his heir Sety II or the obscure usurper Amen¡ messe? Either way, the latter lasted only 3 or 4 years, while, for 6 years, as pharaoh Sety II added no achievements to his generalship un¡ der  his father. At hie death, a young son (by a lesser wife), Siptah, reigned for another six years, real power resting in the hands of the dowager queen Tewosret and the chancellor Bay, a high official of foreign origin. Later rul¡ ers (in their own propaganda- interest) viewed these years as a time of corruption and decline with a foreigner ruling Egypt at his whim. At Siptah's early death, Tewosret herself briefly took over as female pharaoh in her own right. But with her, the dynasty of Ramesses II dis¡ appeared	forever.	Instead,		a	new		man, Sethnakhte, took the throne (founding the Turentieth		Dyn::isty),	nrl	hi,		,nn	R m¡ esses III-an ardent admirer of Ramesses II¡ had to safeguard Egypt through a turbulent world, fending off would-be invaders from west and north.


R.fu"\IESSES II
IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Ramesses II: Idealized Pharaoh
For an entire century, beginning with Ram¡ c5scs III, every pharaoh was (or became) a Ramesses (now numbered IV to XI), such was the aura of the name. His vast buildings and heroir ur r scene,, with perhaps folk memory
of the  peace and prosperity of his era, com¡
bined to confer a halo of greatness on Ramesses II, a highly visible level of attainment for later kings to aspire to. Thus, Ramesses IV claimed to ha...-e benefited the gods more in four years than Harnesses II did in sixty-seven years, ask¡ ing for correspondmg reward; but his boast was not accepted and his wish left unfulfilled.

Ramesses II in Later Tradition
In Egypt's Late Period, the title "king's son of Ramesses" was still found at court for some time after such kings ceased to reign, and the Ramesside style in royal titulary persisted for nearly four hundred years thereafter. The cult of Ramcsscs II lasted at Abydos and Memphis practically to Hellenistic times. So did tales of Egyptian deities sent to foreign lands to heal distant ro,Àalties in Harnesses II's time. One such was used to bolster the cult of Khans in Thebes. Such tales were a reflex of Egyptian
doctors going to the Hittite court almost one thousand years before. Still later, into Roman times, the tales about Prince Setna Khaem¡ waset made exciting reading. Tourists of the
Greco-Roman period took in at Thebes the "tomb of Ozymandyas" (the Ramesseum), reinterpreting the Qadesh reliefs as wars in  Bactria, the  "back of beyond" in  their time. Along with fleeting mention of the name Ramesses in the Bible, these late classical accounts were our sole surviving record of the king from late antiquity to the eve of modern times.

Rames.ses II in Modern Perspective
The decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs early in the nineteenth century led to the re¡ covery of Egypt's history. Work intensified this century and has restored to view the epoch of Ramesses II as of other pharaohs. With the recovery of the royal mummies in the 1880s, Ramesses II himself was brought to our gaze. Combined ,,ith the works of Sety I and Ram¡ esses III, the great buildings and heroic war scenes of Ramesses II impressed some Victorian-age  observers  as  they  did  the
Twentieth D:--nasty. Ramesses II became the popular archetype of all conquering and builder pharaohs. This lurks behind such works as Giuseppe Verdi's Aida (storv line in¡ spired by the Egyptologist Auguste Mariette) and Cecil B. DeMille's film epics The Ten Commandments (1923 and 1956). Even in the international UNESCO campaign to save the archaeological heritage of Nubia from the wa¡ ters of the Aswan High Dam, the images of fiame e II aml Al.Ju Simuel were the uue used to stir the world's imagination.


773










  What of the man himself, in his owu t:poch? He could be a headstrong and stubborn indi¡ vidual, as at Qadesh and in persistent wars thi=>.re::ifter. But he lenned with time :;i.nd was shrewd enough to agree peace with Thattushili
III when the opportunity came. He and his fa¡
ther seem to have been able to pick good sub¡ ordinates, so that Egypt appears to have been prosperous and well-run under their regime, by contrast with the following dynasty. Both kings also showed interest in their work forces, some¡ times offering them the equivalent of bonuses for special or sustained effort. Within his limits, and even if some other l<ing3 v.Àcrc more truly great, Ramesses II may well ha\Àe fulfilled
ma.at (right and justice) for his people much of
the time.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

A comprehensive account of the life a:::d times of Ramesses II with extensive reference to sources will be found in K. A. KITCHEN, Pharaoh Triumphant: The Life and Times of Ramesses II (1g&2. A well¡ illustrated survey is given by RITA E. Fr.EED, Ram¡ esses the (;reat exhibition catalogue 1gS7). The main sources in hieroglyphs are available in vols. 2, 3, and 7 of K. A. KITCHEN, ed., Ramessi.'!e Inscrip¡ tions: Historical and  Biographical, 8 ,À,1ls. (19fig-

1990). A matching set of translations is being processed for publication (K. A. KITCHEN, Ramesside Inscriptions, Translated  and  Annotated, 2  vols.
(1993), which will replace the valued but aging ver¡ sions in J. H. BREASTED, Ancient Records of Egypt, vol. 3, The Nineteenth Dynasty (i906; repr. 1962).
  On wars of Ramesses II (other than Qadesh), see 1::. A. KITCHE:s, "Some New Light on the Asiatic W.ars ofRamesses II," Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 50 (1964); for texts of Qadesh, see SIR ALAN GARDINER, The Kadesh Inscriptions of Ramesses II (1960). For war scenes and others, see G. A. GABALLA, Narrative in Egyptian Art (1976). For studies of Egyptian doc¡ tors at the Hittite court, see ELMAR EDEL, Agyptische ArztP. und ii.2u11tiw hP. M1>dfain mn h,:,tl,Hiorh"11 "I<' on¡ igshof (197fi); in the later tradition, M. BROZE, La Princesse de Bakhtan (1g89). For Prince Khaem¡ waset, see FAROUK GOMAA, Chaemwese, Sohn Ram¡ ses' II uncl Huherpriester von Memphis (1973). For royal workmen at Dayr al-Madina, see MORRIS L. BIERBRIER,  The Tomb-Builders of  the  Pharaohs (1g82). On royal cults, see LABIB HABACHI. Features of the Deification of Ramesses II (1969). On popular re¡ ligion, see ASHRAF ISKANDER SADEK, Popular Religion in Egypt During the New Kingdom (1g87); for elite developments see JAN ASSMANN, Re und Amun (1g83). A  convenient  source  for  Egyptian  literature  is
.\URIAM  LICHTHEIM,  Ancient  Egyptian  Literature,
vols. z-3 (1976-1g8o). On Mariette and Aida, see JEA.'1-MARCEL HUMBERT, "Mariette Pacha and Verdi's Aida," Antiquity 59 (1985). On Merneptah, see sources in HOURIC SOUROUZIAN, Les Monuments du rni 1Werneptah (1!)89).


SEE ALSO Palaces and Temples of Ancient Egypt (Part 4, Vol. I); The History of Ancient Egypt: An HÀ,erview and accompanying map (Part 5, Vol. II); Khattushili ill: King of the Hittites (Part 5, Vol. II); Ancient Egyptian Literature: An Overview (Part 9, Vol. IV); and Ancient Egyp¡ tian Reliefs, Statuary, and Monumental Paintings (Part 10, Vol. IV).

















774

























